[PAGE 1]
Citation: Yang, R.; Chen, Z.; Wang,
B.; Guo, Y.; Hu, L. A Lightweight
Detection Method for Remote
Sensing Images and Its
Energy-Efﬁcient Accelerator on Edge
Devices. Sensors 2023, 23, 6497.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s23146497
Academic Editors: Zhongkai Feng,
Shiping Wen and Cihui Yang
Received: 30 May 2023
Revised: 4 July 2023
Accepted: 12 July 2023
Published: 18 July 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
A Lightweight Detection Method for Remote Sensing Images
and Its Energy-Efﬁcient Accelerator on Edge Devices
Ruiheng Yang, Zhikun Chen *
 , Bin’an Wang, Yunfei Guo and Lingtong Hu
School of Automation (School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence), Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China;
212060164@hdu.edu.cn (R.Y.); 211060043@hdu.edu.cn (B.W.); gyf@hdu.edu.cn (Y.G.);
222060235@hdu.edu.cn (L.H.)
* Correspondence: czk@hdu.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-135-0681-2566
Abstract: Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been extensively employed in remote sensing
image detection and have exhibited impressive performance over the past few years. However,
the abovementioned networks are generally limited by their complex structures, which make them
difﬁcult to deploy with power-sensitive and resource-constrained remote sensing edge devices. To
tackle this problem, this study proposes a lightweight remote sensing detection network suitable
for edge devices and an energy-efﬁcient CNN accelerator based on ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs). First, a series of network weight reduction and optimization methods are proposed to
reduce the size of the network and the difﬁculty of hardware deployment. Second, a high-energy-
efﬁciency CNN accelerator is developed. The accelerator employs a reconﬁgurable and efﬁcient
convolutional processing engine to perform CNN computations, and hardware optimization was
performed for the proposed network structure. The experimental results obtained with the Xilinx
ZYNQ Z7020 show that the network achieved higher accuracy with a smaller size, and the CNN
accelerator for the proposed network exhibited a throughput of 29.53 GOPS and power consumption
of only 2.98 W while consuming only 113 DSPs. In comparison with relevant work, DSP efﬁciency at
an identical level of energy consumption was increased by 1.1–2.5 times, conﬁrming the superiority
of the proposed solution and its potential for deployment with remote sensing edge devices.
Keywords: remote sensing; lightweight neural network; CNN accelerator; ﬁeld-programmable gate
arrays (FPGAs)
1. Introduction
The use of object detection technology with remote sensing images is aimed at obtain-
ing a speciﬁed region of interest from an image based on a speciﬁc algorithm to determine
its location and category. The early target detection algorithms for remote sensing images
employed artiﬁcial design features, but they could not capture abstract semantic features
effectively. Thanks to the development of deep learning and computer vision over the past
few years, numerous high-precision object detection models based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have been proposed for remote sensing image processing, which has no-
tably improved the efﬁciency of feature extraction from remote sensing images, and object
detection from remote sensing images based on deep learning has also developed rapidly.
It has been extensively employed in ship detection [ 1–3], meteorological environment
detection [4,5], husbandry monitoring [6,7], road extraction [8–10], and other ﬁelds.
Conventional image processing algorithms should transmit remote sensing images
back to the ground station server for centralized processing [11]. This processing method is
signiﬁcantly limited by the computing power of the ground station server and the commu-
nication delay between the remote sensing platform and the ground station and cannot keep
up with the speed of remote sensing image acquisition, resulting in considerable amounts
of image data being idle or even discarded and a serious waste of resources [ 12]. Edge
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23146497 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 2]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 2 of 27
computing can be adopted to address the inherent delay problem in centralized processing
methods: the processing of remote sensing image data can be pushed from the ground
station server to the remote sensing edge device, and image processing algorithms can be
applied close to the data source to avoid the computing power bottlenecking arising from
transmission delay. Edge computing has the advantages of low latency, high feasibility, and
good real-time performance. Accordingly, remote sensing image processing algorithms
with high-computational consumption characteristics are more suitable for migration to
edge devices. Detection algorithms for remote sensing edge devices have been actively
researched recently [13–16].
As CNNs have been continuously advancing, the increasing number of network layers
has enhanced the network feature extraction ability, and the number of parameters and
the size of the model have been also increased. Many researchers have investigated how
to reduce the parameters and calculations of CNN algorithms. One method is to design a
lightweight structure for the network (e.g., ShufﬂeNet [ 17] and MobileNet [18]), and vari-
ous researches have also made improvements based on these lightweight networks [19,20].
Zhao et al. [19] replaced the backbone of YOLOv4 with ShufﬂeNetv2. Saiful Bahri et al. [ 20]
replaced the backbone of the SSD network with MobileNetv2. Both achieved high accuracy
with a smaller size. However, the above-mentioned networks require additional hardware
optimization if they are to be deployed in edge devices because the depth-wise separable
convolution they adopt causes a large number of memory access events in the edge de-
vice hardware, resulting in problems such as high energy consumption and low energy
efﬁciency. Another effective method refers to pruning the models [21,22]. Gale et al. [21]
proposed a sparse optimization strategy with ImageNet and well reduced the number
of parameters. Jorge et al. [ 22] removed nearly 99.5% of parameters while keeping the
networks trainable. However, the above-described methods signiﬁcantly affect the accuracy
of CNN models, and they may not even conform to the needs of practical applications
involving edge devices.
Thus, how networks can be lightweight and deployed with edge hardware platforms
while ensuring high precision has become a new challenge [ 23]. To tackle this problem,
some researchers have designed lightweight network architectures suitable for edge de-
vices [24,25]. Ma et al. [ 24] proposed a lightweight detector for remote sensing images.
Fu et al. [25] proposed a fast detection model for UAV edge devices and achieved high
accuracy. However, these lightweight methods often only meet the availability require-
ments of edge device processing but cannot guarantee real-time detection performance.
Accordingly, the acceleration of network inference is necessary.
Common high-performance acceleration platforms include graphics processing units
(GPUs), central processing units (CPUs), and so forth. However, these devices are dif-
ﬁcult to deploy in embedded edge devices due to their high power consumption, and
thus ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), and application-speciﬁc integrated circuits
(ASICs) with low power consumption have been widely employed to enhance computing
performance. The ASIC is characterized by a high degree of customization, high R&D
costs, and a long R&D cycle, and thus it cannot be applied to object detection, where the
model is constantly changing [26]. FPGAs include considerable programmable logic units
while exhibiting a static global reconﬁguration, the ability for pipeline parallel comput-
ing, and high energy efﬁciency, allowing them to be applied to the object detection ﬁeld
where the algorithm model is changing rapidly and must conform to the energy efﬁciency
requirements of edge devices [27].
However, existing FPGA accelerators tend to trade area for performance, i.e., exploit-
ing more hardware resources to obtain higher computing throughput, whereas energy
efﬁciency is rarely increased. For instance, Zhang et al. [28] proposed a high-performance
accelerator for deep convolution neural networks, consuming 2833 DSPs and achieving
a power consumption of 26 W. Li et al. [29] proposed an efﬁcient remote sensing images
detection framework and its high-throughput accelerator based on the FPGA, and a power
of 19.52 W and 1152 DSPs were consumed. Such hardware resource consumption is unac-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 3]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 3 of 27
ceptable on remote sensing edge devices with strict power limits. Thus, an energy-efﬁcient
CNN accelerator with less hardware resource consumption should be urgently developed.
In addition, existing research on FPGA accelerators has only deployed the target detection
network at the hardware level, whereas the necessity of lightweight algorithms has been
ignored [30,31]. Sledeviˇ c et al. [30] proposed a CNN core architecture for VGG networks.
Hareth et al. [31] proposed a 2D PE array to accelerate convolutional operations in AlexNet.
To conform to the deployment requirements of these networks, researchers have to use
more hardware resources, which also means higher power consumption. Therefore, if the
accelerator can be co-optimized at the software and hardware levels, a higher throughput
may be achieved with lower power consumption.
Following the above discussion, a lightweight remote sensing image detection model
and its high-efﬁciency hardware acceleration solution are proposed. The overall contribu-
tions are summarized as follows:
• Based on YOLOv3, several network lightweight methods are proposed:
• Using lightweight GhostNet as a feature extraction network.
• Compressing the model by channel pruning and restoring the precision by knowledge
distillation.
• Performing ﬁxed-point quantization of parameters to reduce the difﬁculty of network
hardware deployment.
• An energy-efﬁcient CNN accelerator is designed based on the lightweight methods:
• According to the characteristics of the optimized network, different convolutional
computation engines for different modules are designed to increase the efﬁciency of
computing resources.
• The SE attention mechanism in the network in hardware friendly aspects is optimized
to expedite the network inference.
• For data storage optimization, a dual cache mechanism and convenient memory access
storage method are adopted to reduce memory access overhead.
The rest of this study is organized as follows. In Section 2, the speciﬁc principles
and methods of the solution are introduced, including network lightweight and CNN
accelerator design. In Section 3, the experimental results and performance evaluation
are presented. In Section 4, the innovation and limitations of this solution, as well as its
possible applications and implications are discussed. In Section 5, a conclusion of this study
is drawn.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Improved Lightweight Ghost-YOLOS Network
2.1.1. Network Structure
The YOLO (You Only Look Once) algorithm solves object detection as a regression
problem [32]. This algorithm conforms to the main principle of outputting the class
probability, location, bounding box, and other information of the respective object in
the input images using an independent end-to-end network. The YOLOv3 inherits the
advantages of a fast detection speed, high-detection accuracy and strong generalization
ability of the previous two generations of the YOLO network, while adding three object
detection scales that are capable of detecting large-scale objects, medium-scale objects and
small-scale objects [33]. Nevertheless, the parameters amount of YOLOv3 is excessively
large, and the model occupies excessive resources, such that it is difﬁcult to transplant
to edge devices for real-time data processing. The original YOLOv3 model structure is
improved to reduce the complexity of the model and parameters.
The original YOLOv3 network comprises two parts, i.e., backbone and YOLO head.
In this study, the GhostNet network structure is employed, and the Darknet-53 backbone
feature extraction network in YOLOv3 is replaced with it. Figure 1 presents the optimized
network structure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 4]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 4 of 27
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 28 
 
 
feature extraction network in YOLOv3 is replaced with it. Figure 1 presents the opti-
mized network structure. 
  
Figure 1. Improved Ghost-YOLO network structure. SE module means Squeeze and Excitation 
module, which is only present in the GBN  structures at layers 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 16  in Ghost-
BottleNeck. Dw Conv module means depthwise separable convolution.  
GhostNet network structure is proposed by Han et al. [ 34]. The main improvement 
conforms to Ghost module, which can make the whole network of the amount of com-
putation and the number of parameters notably reduced without changing the convolu-
tional output feature map size and channel size. The comparison between conventional 
convolution and Ghost module is shown in Figure 2.  
Figure 1. Improved Ghost-YOLO network structure. SE module means Squeeze and Excitation mod-
ule, which is only present in the GBN structures at layers 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 16 in GhostBottleNeck.
Dw Conv module means depthwise separable convolution.
GhostNet network structure is proposed by Han et al. [34]. The main improvement con-
forms to Ghost module, which can make the whole network of the amount of computation
and the number of parameters notably reduced without changing the convolutional output
feature map size and channel size. The comparison between conventional convolution and
Ghost module is shown in Figure 2.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 28 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Comparison of common convolution and ghost module. 
If the input feature diagram is expressed as HWC×× , then the output is  
HW M′′×× ; the input is divided into  n  layers, the size of the convolution kernel is 
kk× , then the calculation amount of common convolution and Ghost convolution is 
shown in Equations (1) and (2). From the calculation of the Ghost module, it can be found 
that, through the module, replacing the common convolution can eﬀectively reduce the 
network computational complexity. Moreover, the GhostNet network also introduces an 
SE attention mechanism module into its GhostBottleNeck module structure, which tends 
to increase the speciﬁcity and utilization of features. 
_common convCALC H W M k k C ′′= × × ×××  (1) 
_ ( 1)ghost conv
MMC A L C H W kkC n H W kk nn
′′ ′′= × × ××× + − × × × ××  (2) 
Although the number of parameters of the YOLOv3  g network structure is signiﬁ-
cantly less than that of the original network, it is still diﬃcult to deploy in low- cost em-
bedded devices. Accordingly, the overall network structure should be compressed to 
reduce the resources and memory occupied by it. 
2.1.2. Model Pruning 
To compress the size of the model, this study ﬁrst prunes the Ghost-YOLO network. 
The c hannel pruning method, based on the BN layer, is adopted for network model 
pruning [35]. Figure 3 presents the pruning method. The network model is modiﬁed by 
constantly adjusting the compression ratio of channel pruning. Moreover, the spatial 
complexity of the cropped model and the requirements of edge device hardware de-
ployment are reduced. 
Figure 2. Comparison of common convolution and ghost module.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 5]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 5 of 27
If the input feature diagram is expressed asH× W× C, then the output isH′× W′× M;
the input is divided into n layers, the size of the convolution kernel is k× k, then the calcu-
lation amount of common convolution and Ghost convolution is shown in Equations (1)
and (2). From the calculation of the Ghost module, it can be found that, through the mod-
ule, replacing the common convolution can effectively reduce the network computational
complexity. Moreover, the GhostNet network also introduces an SE attention mechanism
module into its GhostBottleNeck module structure, which tends to increase the speciﬁcity
and utilization of features.
CALC common _conv = H′× W′× M× k× k× C (1)
CALC ghost _conv = H′× W′× M
n × k× k× C + (n− 1)× H′× W′× M
n × k× k (2)
Although the number of parameters of the YOLOv3 g network structure is signiﬁcantly
less than that of the original network, it is still difﬁcult to deploy in low-cost embedded
devices. Accordingly, the overall network structure should be compressed to reduce the
resources and memory occupied by it.
2.1.2. Model Pruning
To compress the size of the model, this study ﬁrst prunes the Ghost-YOLO network.
The channel pruning method, based on the BN layer, is adopted for network model prun-
ing [ 35]. Figure 3 presents the pruning method. The network model is modiﬁed by
constantly adjusting the compression ratio of channel pruning. Moreover, the spatial com-
plexity of the cropped model and the requirements of edge device hardware deployment
are reduced.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 28 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Channel pruning based on BN layer. The channel with scaling factor 0 or close to 0 is de-
leted and the connection is removed. 
2.1.3. Knowledge Distillation 
Channel pruning will cause some loss to the accuracy of model inference prediction. 
Thus, the kn owledge distillation method is employed in the precision restoration and 
ﬁne-tuning of the trimmed Ghost- YOLOP network. The pruned model, Ghost -YOLOP, 
serves as the student model, and the unpruned model, Ghost -YOLO, is adopted as the 
teacher model. For th e classiﬁcation loss of Ghost -YOLO, the knowledge distillation 
method employed by Hinton [ 36] for classiﬁcation is adopted. For the loss of bounded 
regression, Chen’s [37] regression loss method for Faster RCNN is used. The process is 
presented in Figure  4. Compared with the conventional knowledge distillation method  
[36], the calculation of the loss function of the improved knowledge distillation method 
should calculate the classiﬁcation loss , the regression loss , as well as  the intermediate 
layer loss. 
 
Figure 4. Improved knowledge distillation with regression results. 
2.1.4. Network Quantization 
The model obtained by channel pruning and knowledge distillation employs 32 -bit 
ﬂoating-point data. Compared with complex ﬂoating -point arithmetic, ﬁxed -point 
arithmetic in the FPGA and other devices, this new model exhibits the advantages of less 
hardware resource consumption (e.g., DSP and LUT), a higher working frequency and 
fast arithmetic speed, such that the ﬂoating-point data of the model should be c onverted 
into ﬁxed -point data. Moreover, the research shows that [ 38,39] a 16-bit ﬁxed -point 
quantization for the convolutional neural network model is capable of accelerating  the 
model while maintaining good recognition accuracy. Thus, in this study, dynamic 
ﬁxed-point 16-bit quantization [40] is adopted to quantify the weight and bias parameters 
of the model, input and output feature graphs and intermediate results, with the  aim of 
reducing the bit width of data and the amount of computation and data transmission. 
Figure 3. Channel pruning based on BN layer. The channel with scaling factor 0 or close to 0 is
deleted and the connection is removed.
2.1.3. Knowledge Distillation
Channel pruning will cause some loss to the accuracy of model inference prediction.
Thus, the knowledge distillation method is employed in the precision restoration and ﬁne-
tuning of the trimmed Ghost-YOLOP network. The pruned model, Ghost-YOLOP , serves as
the student model, and the unpruned model, Ghost-YOLO, is adopted as the teacher model.
For the classiﬁcation loss of Ghost-YOLO, the knowledge distillation method employed by
Hinton [36] for classiﬁcation is adopted. For the loss of bounded regression, Chen’s [37]
regression loss method for Faster RCNN is used. The process is presented in Figure 4.
Compared with the conventional knowledge distillation method [36], the calculation of
the loss function of the improved knowledge distillation method should calculate the
classiﬁcation loss, the regression loss, as well as the intermediate layer loss.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 6]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 6 of 27
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 28 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Channel pruning based on BN layer. The channel with scaling factor 0 or close to 0 is de-
leted and the connection is removed. 
2.1.3. Knowledge Distillation 
Channel pruning will cause some loss to the accuracy of model inference prediction. 
Thus, the kn owledge distillation method is employed in the precision restoration and 
ﬁne-tuning of the trimmed Ghost- YOLOP network. The pruned model, Ghost -YOLOP, 
serves as the student model, and the unpruned model, Ghost -YOLO, is adopted as the 
teacher model. For th e classiﬁcation loss of Ghost -YOLO, the knowledge distillation 
method employed by Hinton [ 36] for classiﬁcation is adopted. For the loss of bounded 
regression, Chen’s [37] regression loss method for Faster RCNN is used. The process is 
presented in Figure  4. Compared with the conventional knowledge distillation method  
[36], the calculation of the loss function of the improved knowledge distillation method 
should calculate the classiﬁcation loss , the regression loss , as well as  the intermediate 
layer loss. 
 
Figure 4. Improved knowledge distillation with regression results. 
2.1.4. Network Quantization 
The model obtained by channel pruning and knowledge distillation employs 32 -bit 
ﬂoating-point data. Compared with complex ﬂoating -point arithmetic, ﬁxed -point 
arithmetic in the FPGA and other devices, this new model exhibits the advantages of less 
hardware resource consumption (e.g., DSP and LUT), a higher working frequency and 
fast arithmetic speed, such that the ﬂoating-point data of the model should be c onverted 
into ﬁxed -point data. Moreover, the research shows that [ 38,39] a 16-bit ﬁxed -point 
quantization for the convolutional neural network model is capable of accelerating  the 
model while maintaining good recognition accuracy. Thus, in this study, dynamic 
ﬁxed-point 16-bit quantization [40] is adopted to quantify the weight and bias parameters 
of the model, input and output feature graphs and intermediate results, with the  aim of 
reducing the bit width of data and the amount of computation and data transmission. 
Figure 4. Improved knowledge distillation with regression results.
2.1.4. Network Quantization
The model obtained by channel pruning and knowledge distillation employs 32-
bit ﬂoating-point data. Compared with complex ﬂoating-point arithmetic, ﬁxed-point
arithmetic in the FPGA and other devices, this new model exhibits the advantages of less
hardware resource consumption (e.g., DSP and LUT), a higher working frequency and fast
arithmetic speed, such that the ﬂoating-point data of the model should be converted into
ﬁxed-point data. Moreover, the research shows that [38,39] a 16-bit ﬁxed-point quantization
for the convolutional neural network model is capable of accelerating the model while
maintaining good recognition accuracy. Thus, in this study, dynamic ﬁxed-point 16-bit
quantization [40] is adopted to quantify the weight and bias parameters of the model,
input and output feature graphs and intermediate results, with the aim of reducing the bit
width of data and the amount of computation and data transmission. The above-described
method primarily seeks the optimal exponent-marker through traversal, as expressed
in Equation (3).
expQ = argmin
n
∑
i=0
⏐⏐⏐Qi
f loat− Qi
(bw,expw)
⏐⏐⏐ (3)
where expQ denotes the exponent-marker with the least loss of precision after quantization,
n represents the amount of data that should be quantiﬁed, Qi
f loat expresses the original
ﬂoating-point value of the i− th number, Qi
(bw,expw) denotes the i− th number under bit
width bw and exponent-marker expw, which is quantized to a ﬁxed-point number ﬁrst, and
then converted back to a new ﬂoating-point value.
2.2. FPGA-Based Hardware Accelerator
In this section, the proposed FPGA-based hardware accelerator is elucidated, whose
block scheme is shown in Figure 5. The system comprises three parts, i.e., Double Data
Rate (DDR) Synchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory (SDRAM), Processing System
(PS) and Programmable Logic (PL).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 7]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 7 of 27
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 28 
 
 
The above-described method primarily seeks the optimal exponent -marker through tra-
versal, as expressed in Equation (3). 
0
w
n
ii
Q float ( bw,exp )
i
exp arg min Q Q
=
= −∑  (3) 
where Qexp  denotes the exponent-marker with the least loss of precision after quantiza-
tion, n represents the amount of data that should be quantiﬁed, i
floatQ  expresses the 
original ﬂoating- point value of the th−i  number, 
w
i
( bw,exp )Q  denotes the thi−  number 
under bit width  bw  and exponent -marker wexp , which is quantized to a ﬁxed- point 
number ﬁrst, and then converted back to a new ﬂoating-point value. 
2.2. FPGA-Based Hardware Accelerator 
In this section, the proposed FPGA-based hardware accelerator is elucidated, whose 
block scheme is shown in Figure 5. The system comprises three parts, i.e., Double Data 
Rate (DDR) Synchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory (SDRAM), Processing Sys-
tem (PS) and Programmable Logic (PL). 
 
Figure 5. CNN accelerator architecture . The main part comprises buﬀer, processing engines, 
post-processing module and output module. The buﬀer section adopts dual cache design. The ac-
celerator operates in a modular sequence in most cases.  The symbols “H, W” mean the height and 
weight, the symbols “Ci, Co” mean the number of input and output channels, and the number of 
channels, and the symbol “K” means the size of convolution kernel. 
Despite the lightweight processing of neural networks, the memory footprint of the 
network (approximately 1 6 M bit) is still much larger than that of low -cost FPGA’s 
available on-chip memory (less than 1 Mbit). Accordingly, we use DDR to store the fea-
ture maps and weights in the network inference process.  
The PS part controls the whole accelerator of the PL part by transmitting instructions 
through the data interface module, such as controlling the enable of each module to ex-
ecute the streaming operation in the network model . Moreover, BRAM receives the op-
timal weight data after training on the PC side and the original input image in batches 
Figure 5. CNN accelerator architecture. The main part comprises buffer, processing engines, post-
processing module and output module. The buffer section adopts dual cache design. The accelerator
operates in a modular sequence in most cases. The symbols “H, W” mean the height and weight, the
symbols “Ci, Co” mean the number of input and output channels, and the number of channels, and
the symbol “K” means the size of convolution kernel.
Despite the lightweight processing of neural networks, the memory footprint of the
network (approximately 16 Mbit) is still much larger than that of low-cost FPGA’s available
on-chip memory (less than 1 Mbit). Accordingly, we use DDR to store the feature maps
and weights in the network inference process.
The PS part controls the whole accelerator of the PL part by transmitting instructions
through the data interface module, such as controlling the enable of each module to execute
the streaming operation in the network model. Moreover, BRAM receives the optimal
weight data after training on the PC side and the original input image in batches through
the data interface, and writes the weight and image data into the data transmission buffer.
To realize the efﬁcient utilization of bandwidth, data, weight, and output buffers, it adopts
a “ping-pong” structure to transmit data without any slack.
The PL part is used for convolutional network calculation. It is mainly composed of
some Processing Elements (PE), which can carry out convolution calculation of different
modes with the received data. The other part is post-processing. First, the adder tree is used
to sum and merge the data after the convolution operation. Then, the obtained results are
processed by batch normalization (BN) and activation, which uses Leaky ReLU function to
determine the threshold of pixel value. Lastly, according to the current convolution mode,
is the Ghost Module, which is used to determine whether to concatenate the identity of the
input feature map or use the SE module.
The PE array primarily comprises some Multiplication Accumulators (MACC), and its
architecture is illustrated in Figure 6, where the respective PE unit processes the multiplica-
tion of an input feature map and a set of weights.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 8]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 8 of 27
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 28 
 
 
through the data interface, and writes the weight and image data into the data transmis-
sion buﬀer. To realize the eﬃcient utilization of bandwidth, data, weight, and output 
buﬀers, it adopts a “ping-pong” structure to transmit data without any slack.  
The PL part is used for convolutional network calculation. It is mainly composed of 
some Processing Elements (PE), which can carry out convolution calculation of diﬀerent 
modes with the received data. The other part is post -processing. First, the adder tree is 
used to sum and merge the data after the convolution operation. Then, the obtained re-
sults are processed by batch normalization (BN) and activation, which uses Leaky ReLU 
function to determine the threshold of pixel value. Lastly, according to the current con-
volution mode, is the Ghost Module, which is used to determine whether to concatenate 
the identity of the input feature map or use the SE module. 
The PE array primarily comprises some Multiplication Accumulators (MACC), and 
its architecture is illustrated in Figure 6, where the respective PE unit processes the mul-
tiplication of an input feature map and a set of weights. 
  
Figure 6. CNN accelerator PE array design. Pixels and weights are from the previous buﬀers. 
Figure 7 shows the hardware implementation details of the post-processing module. 
The adder tree is mainly composed of adders and ﬂip -ﬂops, and its main function is to 
accumulate the processing results of the PE unit. If the parallelism of PE array is n , then 
the clock cycle required for processing is  2N=log n . The BN and leaky ReLU module is  
mainly composed of multipliers, adders, and multiplexers. The scaling multiple, bias and 
activation coeﬃcient in the module are stored in the BRAM in advance and read in turn 
during calculation. 
 
Figure 6. CNN accelerator PE array design. Pixels and weights are from the previous buffers.
Figure 7 shows the hardware implementation details of the post-processing module.
The adder tree is mainly composed of adders and ﬂip-ﬂops, and its main function is to
accumulate the processing results of the PE unit. If the parallelism of PE array is n, then
the clock cycle required for processing is N = log2n. The BN and leaky ReLU module is
mainly composed of multipliers, adders, and multiplexers. The scaling multiple, bias and
activation coefﬁcient in the module are stored in the BRAM in advance and read in turn
during calculation.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 28 
 
 
through the data interface, and writes the weight and image data into the data transmis-
sion buﬀer. To realize the eﬃcient utilization of bandwidth, data, weight, and output 
buﬀers, it adopts a “ping-pong” structure to transmit data without any slack.  
The PL part is used for convolutional network calculation. It is mainly composed of 
some Processing Elements (PE), which can carry out convolution calculation of diﬀerent 
modes with the received data. The other part is post -processing. First, the adder tree is 
used to sum and merge the data after the convolution operation. Then, the obtained re-
sults are processed by batch normalization (BN) and activation, which uses Leaky ReLU 
function to determine the threshold of pixel value. Lastly, according to the current con-
volution mode, is the Ghost Module, which is used to determine whether to concatenate 
the identity of the input feature map or use the SE module. 
The PE array primarily comprises some Multiplication Accumulators (MACC), and 
its architecture is illustrated in Figure 6, where the respective PE unit processes the mul-
tiplication of an input feature map and a set of weights. 
  
Figure 6. CNN accelerator PE array design. Pixels and weights are from the previous buﬀers. 
Figure 7 shows the hardware implementation details of the post-processing module. 
The adder tree is mainly composed of adders and ﬂip -ﬂops, and its main function is to 
accumulate the processing results of the PE unit. If the parallelism of PE array is n , then 
the clock cycle required for processing is  2N=log n . The BN and leaky ReLU module is  
mainly composed of multipliers, adders, and multiplexers. The scaling multiple, bias and 
activation coeﬃcient in the module are stored in the BRAM in advance and read in turn 
during calculation. 
 
Figure 7. CNN accelerator post-processing module design. The symbol “Fx” indicates the x-th output
feature, which comes from the output of the PE array. Scaling factor and bias are used for batch
normalization. Activation coefﬁcient is the coefﬁcient of activation function. The symbol “ . . . ”
indicates that we omit the repetitive process.
2.2.1. Data Storage Optimization
In the Ghost-YOLOS network, the computing of the respective layer requires frequent
reading and writing of data to the off-chip DDR, which will lead to the degradation of
hardware accelerator computing performance due to data transmission delay. Thus, the
data reading and storage methods should be optimized.
Dual cache is developed to reduce the transfer time for reading data from DDR to
on-chip and for writing computed results from on-chip back to DDR. The speciﬁc structure

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 9]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 9 of 27
of dual cache design is presented in Figure 8. On the ﬁrst and second clock cycle, the
input data is stored in cache 1 and cache 2 through the input data selector. Moreover,
the data in cache 1 is output to the convolution arithmetic unit through the output data
selector. In the third clock cycle, the input data is stored in cache 1, and the previous
operations are repeated successively to achieve data pipeline-processing and shorten the
time of data transmission from off-chip to on-chip. The size of input cache and output
cache is calculated by Equations (4) and (5).
Nin = Tix× Tiy× dw
MBRAM
× Tn (4)
Nout = Tox× Toy× dw
MBRAM
× Tm (5)
where MBRAM denotes the size of data that can be stored in a piece of BRAM, and dw
represents the data bit width in I/O feature maps.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 28 
 
 
Figure 7. CNN accelerator post-processing module design. The symbol “Fx” indicates the x -th 
output feature, which comes from the output of the PE array. Scaling factor and bias are used for 
batch normalization. Activation coeﬃcient is the coeﬃcient of activation function. The symbol “…” 
indicates that we omit the repetitive process. 
2.2.1. Data Storage Optimization 
In the Ghost -YOLOS network, the computing of the respective layer requires fre-
quent reading and writing of data to the oﬀ-chip DDR, which will lead to the degradation 
of hardware accelerator computing performance due to data transmission delay.  Thus, 
the data reading and storage methods should be optimized. 
Dual cache is developed to reduce the transfer time for reading data from DDR to 
on-chip and for writing computed results from on -chip back to DDR. The speciﬁc struc-
ture of dual cache design is presented in Figure 8. On the ﬁrst and second clock cycle, the 
input data is stored in cache 1 and cache 2 through the input data selector. Moreover, the 
data in cach e 1 is output to the convolution arithmetic unit through the output data se-
lector. In the third clock cycle, the input data is stored in cache 1, and the previous oper-
ations are repeated successively to achieve data pipeline-processing and shorten the time 
of data transmission from oﬀ-chip to on-chip. The size of input cache and output cache is 
calculated by Equations (4) and (5). 
ix iy w
in n
BRAM
TTdNT M
××= ×  (4) 
ox oy w
out m
BRAM
TTdNT M
××= ×  (5) 
where BRAMM  denotes the size of data that can be stored in a piece of BRAM,  and wd  
represents the data bit width in I/O feature maps. 
 
Figure 8. Dual cache design. 
The total delay time for completing a convolution operation with or with out the  
dual cache design is shown in Equations (6) and (7). 
without _ dc read compute writeT TT T = ++  (6) 
_ max( , , )with dc read compute writeT TT T =  (7) 
The Ghost-YOLOS network has considerable convolution operations and frequent 
DDR memory access. By consuming twice the BRAM logic resources, the dual cache de-
sign can signiﬁcantly reduce latency due to data transfer, thereby improving accelerator 
performance. 
The method of array segmentation is adopted to store the data of feature maps and 
weights in the BRAM to solve the problem that excessive data may lead to bottleneck ing 
the data access. The above -described method is capable of increasing the local mem ory 
bandwidth, and it can be combined with the dual cache design to enhance the perfor-
mance of the system’s ability to read and write data. 
Figure 8. Dual cache design.
The total delay time for completing a convolution operation with or without the dual
cache design is shown in Equations (6) and (7).
Twithout _dc = Tread + Tcompute + Twrite (6)
Twith_dc = max(Tread, Tcompute , Twrite ) (7)
The Ghost-YOLOS network has considerable convolution operations and frequent DDR
memory access. By consuming twice the BRAM logic resources, the dual cache design can
significantly reduce latency due to data transfer, thereby improvingaccelerator performance.
The method of array segmentation is adopted to store the data of feature maps and
weights in the BRAM to solve the problem that excessive data may lead to bottlenecking
the data access. The above-described method is capable of increasing the local memory
bandwidth, and it can be combined with the dual cache design to enhance the performance
of the system’s ability to read and write data.
Figure 9 presents the block storage of input feature map data. The input feature map
falls into blocks on the width, height, and the number of channels. The respective block of
data is stored in BRAM in accordance with the order of reading. In the BRAM, the data is
stored from low address to high address. Furthermore, the row parameter index and the
plane parameter index of the input feature map data are stored in the register.
Corresponding to the storage format of the input feature map, the respective weight
in the convolutional kernel is divided and stored in the identical form to match the data of
the input feature map for the convolution operation. The weight is iterated and follows the
order of the number of input channels, the number of output channels, ﬁlter height and
ﬁlter width, and is stored in the block cache (Figure 10).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 10]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 10 of 27
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 28 
 
 
Figure 9 presents the block storage of input feature map data. The input feature map 
falls into blocks on the width, height, and the number of channels. The respective block of 
data is stored in BRAM in accordance with the order of reading. In the BRAM, the data is 
stored from low address to high address. Furthermore, the row parameter index and the 
plane parameter index of the input feature map data are stored in the register. 
 
Figure 9. Block storage of input feature map.  The symbols “H, W, C” mean the height, weight and 
the number of channels, and the symbol ”R” means the number of channels stored in BRAM.  
Corresponding to the storage format of the input feature map, the respective weight 
in the convolutional kernel is divided and stored in the identical form to match the data 
of the input feature map for the convolution operation. The weight is iterated and follows 
the order of the number of input channels, the number of output channels, ﬁlter height 
and ﬁlter width, and is stored in the block cache (Figure 10). 
 
Figure 10. Block storage of weights. The symbols “C, K” mean the number of channels and the size 
of convolution kernel, and the symbol ”R” means the number of channels stored in BRAM.  
2.2.2. Convolution Architecture with High Parallelism 
Convolution calculation occupies most of the calculation in the convolutional neural 
network, so PE array is the core component of the FPGA convolutional neural network 
accelerator, and how to use the resources of the PE array is an important indicator of the 
performance of the hardware accelerator. In the Ghost-YOLOS network, there is not only 
common convolution, but also depth- wise separable convolution , which is in the 
GhostBottleNeck module. Accordingly, to make full use of hardware resources and 
complete computation with a high-parallelism degree, this study designs  diﬀerent ways 
of using the PE array’s resources for diﬀerent convolution modes. 
Figure 9. Block storage of input feature map. The symbols “H, W, C” mean the height, weight and
the number of channels, and the symbol ”R” means the number of channels stored in BRAM.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 28 
 
 
Figure 9 presents the block storage of input feature map data. The input feature map 
falls into blocks on the width, height, and the number of channels. The respective block of 
data is stored in BRAM in accordance with the order of reading. In the BRAM, the data is 
stored from low address to high address. Furthermore, the row parameter index and the 
plane parameter index of the input feature map data are stored in the register. 
 
Figure 9. Block storage of input feature map.  The symbols “H, W, C” mean the height, weight and 
the number of channels, and the symbol ”R” means the number of channels stored in BRAM.  
Corresponding to the storage format of the input feature map, the respective weight 
in the convolutional kernel is divided and stored in the identical form to match the data 
of the input feature map for the convolution operation. The weight is iterated and follows 
the order of the number of input channels, the number of output channels, ﬁlter height 
and ﬁlter width, and is stored in the block cache (Figure 10). 
 
Figure 10. Block storage of weights. The symbols “C, K” mean the number of channels and the size 
of convolution kernel, and the symbol ”R” means the number of channels stored in BRAM.  
2.2.2. Convolution Architecture with High Parallelism 
Convolution calculation occupies most of the calculation in the convolutional neural 
network, so PE array is the core component of the FPGA convolutional neural network 
accelerator, and how to use the resources of the PE array is an important indicator of the 
performance of the hardware accelerator. In the Ghost-YOLOS network, there is not only 
common convolution, but also depth- wise separable convolution , which is in the 
GhostBottleNeck module. Accordingly, to make full use of hardware resources and 
complete computation with a high-parallelism degree, this study designs  diﬀerent ways 
of using the PE array’s resources for diﬀerent convolution modes. 
Figure 10. Block storage of weights. The symbols “C, K” mean the number of channels and the size
of convolution kernel, and the symbol ”R” means the number of channels stored in BRAM.
2.2.2. Convolution Architecture with High Parallelism
Convolution calculation occupies most of the calculation in the convolutional neural
network, so PE array is the core component of the FPGA convolutional neural network
accelerator, and how to use the resources of the PE array is an important indicator of
the performance of the hardware accelerator. In the Ghost-YOLOS network, there is
not only common convolution, but also depth-wise separable convolution, which is in
the GhostBottleNeck module. Accordingly, to make full use of hardware resources and
complete computation with a high-parallelism degree, this study designs different ways of
using the PE array’s resources for different convolution modes.
For common convolution, the PE array employs parallel computation at the channel
level, and the architecture is illustrated in Figure 11. In the identical clock cycle, the
respective row of the PE array reads the convolve window at the identical position on the
input feature map of R channels, whereas the respective column reads the convolution
kernel weights of C input feature maps and then performs the convolution calculation in
pairs. The computing resources employ a total of R× C groups of the PE units. After K× K
clock cycles, the convolution results of a set of convolve windows and convolution kernels
are determined, and then the convolve window is moved for all convolution calculations
on the current feature map before inputting the next channel feature map.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 11]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 11 of 27
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 28 
 
 
For common convolution, the PE array employs parallel computation at the channel 
level, and the architecture is illustrated in Figure 11. In the identical clock cycle, the r e-
spective row of the PE array reads the convolve window at the identical position on the 
input feature map of R  channels, whereas the respective column reads the convolution 
kernel weights of C input feature maps and then performs the convolution calculation in 
pairs. The computing resources employ a total of  RC×  groups of the PE units. After  
KK×  clock cycles, the convolution results of a set of convolve windows and convolu-
tion kernels are determined, and then the convolve window is moved for all convolution 
calculations on the current feature map before inputting the next channel feature map.  
 
Figure 11. PE array architecture in common convolution mode. 
For depth-wise separable convolution, the design for common convolution cannot 
exhibit a high degree of parallelism. Depth -wise separable convolution comprises  
depth-wise convolution and pointwise convolution [41]. For depth-wise convolution, the 
respective output feature map is generated by convolving the single- channel input fea-
ture map with the corresponding unique convolution kernel. Thus, compared with the 
conventional common convolution, the channel parallel features , scalable by depth-wise 
convolution, are reduced by one dimension.  
Figure 12 presents the process of depth -wise convolution and its application in the 
common convolution PE array. In the PE array, only the input channel feature maps and 
weights of the PE units on the diagonal are corresponding. As indicated by the above 
result, only 
R  computing units are adopted in the depth- wise convolution calculation 
process, and  1R (R )×−  computing units exhibit the non-enabled state, such that the 
maximum hardware utilization eﬃciency is not achieved. 
Figure 11. PE array architecture in common convolution mode.
For depth-wise separable convolution, the design for common convolution cannot ex-
hibit a high degree of parallelism. Depth-wise separable convolution comprises depth-wise
convolution and pointwise convolution [41]. For depth-wise convolution, the respective
output feature map is generated by convolving the single-channel input feature map with
the corresponding unique convolution kernel. Thus, compared with the conventional
common convolution, the channel parallel features, scalable by depth-wise convolution,
are reduced by one dimension.
Figure 12 presents the process of depth-wise convolution and its application in the
common convolution PE array. In the PE array, only the input channel feature maps and
weights of the PE units on the diagonal are corresponding. As indicated by the above result,
only R computing units are adopted in the depth-wise convolution calculation process,
and R× (R− 1) computing units exhibit the non-enabled state, such that the maximum
hardware utilization efﬁciency is not achieved.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 28 
 
 
  
Figure 12. Depth-wise convolution and its application in common convolution mode. The symbol 
“R” means the number of channels. 
Accordingly, to ensure that the computing engine shares the same PE array archi-
tecture with the common convolution in depth- wise convolution, and to ensure higher 
eﬃciency of computing resources during operation, the deep convolutional mode carries 
out additional data management through the controller, as shown in Figure 13.  
First, the PE array is divided into Block Processing Elements (BPE) with a parallel-
ism degree of Q , where Q  is the parallel factor of diﬀerent input images. Then, each 
BPE obtains the feature maps of diﬀerent input channels and the weights of data and 
corresponding channels from the feature map and weight buﬀe r, respectively . Mean-
while, BPE contains  R  group of Window Processing Element (WPE) for multiplication 
calculation. Computations of a single sliding window are processed in parallel in each 
WPE.  
 
Figure 13. PE array architecture in depth-wise convolution mode. The symbol “Q” means the par-
allel factor of diﬀerent input images. 
Figure 12. Depth-wise convolution and its application in common convolution mode. The symbol
“R” means the number of channels.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 12]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 12 of 27
Accordingly, to ensure that the computing engine shares the same PE array architecture
with the common convolution in depth-wise convolution, and to ensure higher efﬁciency of
computing resources during operation, the deep convolutional mode carries out additional
data management through the controller, as shown in Figure 13.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 28 
 
 
  
Figure 12. Depth-wise convolution and its application in common convolution mode. The symbol 
“R” means the number of channels. 
Accordingly, to ensure that the computing engine shares the same PE array archi-
tecture with the common convolution in depth- wise convolution, and to ensure higher 
eﬃciency of computing resources during operation, the deep convolutional mode carries 
out additional data management through the controller, as shown in Figure 13.  
First, the PE array is divided into Block Processing Elements (BPE) with a parallel-
ism degree of Q , where Q  is the parallel factor of diﬀerent input images. Then, each 
BPE obtains the feature maps of diﬀerent input channels and the weights of data and 
corresponding channels from the feature map and weight buﬀe r, respectively . Mean-
while, BPE contains  R  group of Window Processing Element (WPE) for multiplication 
calculation. Computations of a single sliding window are processed in parallel in each 
WPE.  
 
Figure 13. PE array architecture in depth-wise convolution mode. The symbol “Q” means the par-
allel factor of diﬀerent input images. 
Figure 13. PE array architecture in depth-wise convolution mode. The symbol “Q” means the parallel
factor of different input images.
First, the PE array is divided into Block Processing Elements (BPE) with a parallelism
degree of Q, where Q is the parallel factor of different input images. Then, each BPE obtains
the feature maps of different input channels and the weights of data and corresponding
channels from the feature map and weight buffer, respectively. Meanwhile, BPE contains R
group of Window Processing Element (WPE) for multiplication calculation. Computations
of a single sliding window are processed in parallel in each WPE.
In the identical clock cycle, the computational architecture ﬁrst loadsR× P weights
from the weight buffer per column. When the channels of the input feature map remain
unchanged, the identical batch of weights are employed for the respective convolution
calculation, such that the weights can remain unchanged. Next,P pixels of a single convolve
window on R input channel feature maps of Q allows different images to be read from the
data buffer, respectively, and transferred to different PE’s for multiplication calculation.
Thus, the parallel multiplication calculation of the PE array can be increased to P× R× Q.
The moving mode of the convolve window also gives priority to traversing the whole
feature map, and then calculating the feature map of the next set of input channels until Q
different input images have completed the convolution operation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 13]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 13 of 27
2.2.3. SE Module Hardware Optimization
The SE attention mechanism is critical in GhostBottleNeck, and it appears in layer 4, 5,
10, 11, 12, 14, 16 GBN modules of the Ghost-YOLOS network. The basic architecture of the
SE attention mechanism is illustrated in Figure 14, wherein both FC layers are equivalent
to an unbiased linear transformation of the input of the previous layer, which can directly
use the convolution computing structure mentioned in Section 2.2.2 for parallel operation,
and the ReLU function can be implemented by a selector in hardware. Accordingly, it is the
global pooling layer and the Sigmoid function that require hardware optimization.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 28 
 
 
In the identical clock cycle, the computational architecture ﬁrst loads RP×  weights 
from the weight buﬀer per column. When the channels of the input feature map remain 
unchanged, the identical batch of weights are employed for the respective convolution 
calculation, such that the weights can remain unchanged. Next, P pixels of a single 
convolve window on R  input channel feature maps of Q  allows diﬀerent images to be 
read from the data buﬀe r, respectively, and transferred to diﬀerent PE’s  for multiplica-
tion calculation. Thus, the parallel multiplication calculation of the PE array can be in-
creased to PRQ×× . The moving mode of the convolve window also gives priority to 
traversing the whole feature map, and then calculating the feature map of the next set of 
input channels until Q  diﬀerent input images have completed the convolution opera-
tion. 
2.2.3. SE Module Hardware Optimization 
The SE attention mechanism is critical in GhostBottleNeck, and it appears in layer 4, 
5, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16 GBN modules of the Ghost-YOLOS network. The basic architecture of 
the SE attention mechanism is illustrated in Figure 14, wherein both FC layers are equiv-
alent to an unbiased linear transformation of the input of the previous layer, which can 
directly use the convolution computing structure mentioned in Section 2.2.2 for parallel 
operation, and the ReLU function can be implemen t e d  b y  a  s e l e c t o r  i n  h a r d w a r e .  A c -
cordingly, it is the global pooling layer and the Sigmoid function that require hardware 
optimization. 
 
Figure 14. SE module in the Ghost-YOLOS network and FC operation optimization.  iF  and oF  
means input and output feature map. _new iF  means the feature map after transformation. hK  and 
wK  mean the width and height of the converted convolution kernel. 
Figure 14. SE module in the Ghost-YOLOS network and FC operation optimization. Fi and Fo means
input and output feature map. Fnew_i means the feature map after transformation. Kh and Kw mean
the width and height of the converted convolution kernel.
Global pooling refers to a squeeze operator in the SE module. Two methods (i.e.,
average pooling and max pooling) are available for the global pooling module, with little
difference in the effect on the result [42], whereas the operation of the two methods turns
out to be highly different in hardware. In general, average pooling primarily employs
multiplication and addition operations, which are difﬁcult to complete in a clock cycle,
whereas max pooling only comprises one logical operation, i.e., comparing the size of input
data, which has simple logic and is suitable for running in the FPGA. Thus, we choose to
use max pooling and the two-dimensional (2D) pooling separation method to optimize its
operational logic, and its hardware implementation architecture is shown in the Figure 15.
Compared with the conventional 2D pooling operation implemented in hardware,
one-dimensional (1D) operation has more concise control logic, can avoid a lot of redun-
dant calculation, and is more conducive to hardware implementation. Accordingly, we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 14]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 14 of 27
decompose the 2D pooling into 1D horizontal pooling and 1D vertical pooling. In this
module, a ﬂip-ﬂop is set to cache the data after horizontal pooling. Moreover, pooling
operators of multiple windows can be operated simultaneously to speed up the global
pooling process.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 28 
 
 
Global pooling refers to a squeeze operator in the SE module. Two methods (i.e., 
average pooling and max pooling) are available for the global pooling module, with little 
diﬀerence in the eﬀect on the result [42], whereas the operation of the two methods turns 
out to be highly diﬀerent in hardware. In general, average pooling primarily employs 
multiplication and addition operations, which are diﬃcult to complete in a clock cycle, 
whereas max pooling only comprises one logical operation, i.e., comparing the size of 
input data, which has simple logic and is suitable for running in the FPGA. Thus, we 
choose to use max pooling and the two- dimensional (2D) pooling separation method to 
optimize its operational logic, and its hardware implementation architecture is shown in 
the Figure 15. 
Compared with the conventional 2D pooling operation implemented in hardware, 
one-dimensional (1D) operation has more concise control logic, can avoid a lot of re-
dundant calculation, and is mor e conducive to hardware implementation. Accordingly, 
we decompose the 2D pooling into 1D horizontal pooling and 1D vertical pooling. In this 
module, a ﬂip -ﬂop is set to cache the data after horizontal pooling. Moreover, pooling 
operators of multiple wind ows can be operated simultaneously to speed up the global 
pooling process. 
 
Figure 15. 2D pooling separation of max pooling. DFF is used to cache data. MAX is used to cal-
culate the maximum value. The symbol “K” means the number of channels for pooling operation. 
To further accelerate, in addition to the parallel pipeline of multiple pooling win-
dows, the parallel operation of dataﬂow constraint horizontal pooling and vertical pool-
ing is also adopted. The parallel pipeline based on the dataﬂow constraint does not need 
to wait for horizontal pooling to complete before vertical pooling. If the output of the 
horizontal pooling can be passed to the vertical pooling for operation, both work simul-
taneously, notably improving the eﬃciency of the operation. 
Sigmoid function is one of the activation functions commonly used in neural net-
works, but its exponential property makes it diﬃcult to implement in hardware. Thus, 
we perform a piecewise quadratic ap proximation to increase its hardware friendliness, 
where the coeﬃcients can be stored in the on -chip BRAM in advance. We divided the 
positive semi-axis of Sigmoid function into six subintervals, and the function representa-
tion after piecewise quadratic approximation is shown in Table 1. In the FPGA, the divi-
sion operation can be implemented using shifters to reduce resource consumption. The 
maximum deviation from the original function after approximation falls into a scope of 
0.003, as shown in Figure 16. 
 
 
Figure 15. 2D pooling separation of max pooling. DFF is used to cache data. MAX is used to calculate
the maximum value. The symbol “K” means the number of channels for pooling operation.
To further accelerate, in addition to the parallel pipeline of multiple pooling windows,
the parallel operation of dataﬂow constraint horizontal pooling and vertical pooling is
also adopted. The parallel pipeline based on the dataﬂow constraint does not need to wait
for horizontal pooling to complete before vertical pooling. If the output of the horizontal
pooling can be passed to the vertical pooling for operation, both work simultaneously,
notably improving the efﬁciency of the operation.
Sigmoid function is one of the activation functions commonly used in neural networks,
but its exponential property makes it difﬁcult to implement in hardware. Thus, we perform
a piecewise quadratic approximation to increase its hardware friendliness, where the coefﬁ-
cients can be stored in the on-chip BRAM in advance. We divided the positive semi-axis
of Sigmoid function into six subintervals, and the function representation after piecewise
quadratic approximation is shown in Table 1. In the FPGA, the division operation can be
implemented using shifters to reduce resource consumption. The maximum deviation from
the original function after approximation falls into a scope of 0.003, as shown in Figure 16.
Table 1. The ﬁtting function after piecewise quadratic approximation for FPGA.
Interval Fitting Function Fitting Function for FPGA
(0, 0.5] f (x) = 0.2452x+0.5005 f (x) = (1004 x +2050)/4096
(0.5, 2.45] f (x) =−0.0446x2 + 0.2852x + 0.4908 f (x) = (−183x2 + 1168x + 2010)/4096
(2.45, 4] f (x) =−0.0172x2 + 0.1506x + 0.6533 f (x) = (−70x2 + 617x + 2676)/4096
(4, 5.6] f (x) =−0.0039x2 + 0.0483x + 0.8503 f (x) = (−16x2 + 198x + 3483)/4096
(5.6, 7.5] f (x) = 0.0018x+0.9862 f (x) = (7 x +4039)/4096
(7.5, +∞) f (x) = 1 f (x) = 4096/4096

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 15]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 15 of 27
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 28 
 
 
Table 1. The ﬁtting function after piecewise quadratic approximation for FPGA. 
Interval Fitting Function Fitting Function for FPGA 
(0, 0.5] ( ) 0.2452 +0.5005fx x =  ( ) (1004 + 64205 090) /fx x =  
(0.5, 2.45] 
20.0446 0.2852 0.49 8) 0(fx x x −+= +  2( 183 1168 2010) / 4096()fx x x= −+ +  
(2.45, 4] 
20.0172 0.1506 0.65 3) 3(fx x x −+= +  2( 70 617 2676) / 4096()fx x x= −+ +  
(4, 5.6] 
20.0039 0.0483 0.85 3) 0(fx x x −+= +  2( 16 198 3483) / 4096()fx x x= −+ +  
(5.6, 7.5] ( ) 0.0018 +0.9862fx x =  6( ) (7 +4 403 099) /fx x =  
(7.5, +∞) () 1fx =  ( ) 4096 / 4096fx =  
 
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 16. (a)  Comparison between Sigmoid function and ﬁtting function. ( b) The deviation of the 
ﬁtting function and the Sigmoid function. 
3. Results 
3.1. Experimental Settings 
3.1.1. Dataset 
To evaluate the remote sensing performance of the Ghost-YOLOS lightweight model 
and verify the feasibility of the CNN hardware accelerator results, aerial DOTAv1.0 and 
UAV Visdrone2019 datasets were used for the experimental evaluation. 
The VisDrone2019 [43] dataset is a large UA V perspective dataset. In the oﬃcial da-
ta, there are 6471 images in the train set, 1580 images in the test set and 548 images in the 
validation set, with a total of 11 categories. The samples in this dataset have the following 
characteristics: (1) the objects in small areas are densely distributed; (2) the background is 
complex, and there is target occlusion, insuﬃcient light, and interference from objects of 
a similar shape, etc. (3) , and  many objects  are occluded. Accordingly, this dataset is 
suitable to verify the performance of the Ghost-YOLOS network in detecting small ob-
jects. Some sample pictures of the validation set are shown in Figure 17a. 
Figure 16. (a) Comparison between Sigmoid function and ﬁtting function. (b) The deviation of the
ﬁtting function and the Sigmoid function.
3. Results
3.1. Experimental Settings
3.1.1. Dataset
To evaluate the remote sensing performance of the Ghost-YOLOS lightweight model
and verify the feasibility of the CNN hardware accelerator results, aerial DOTAv1.0 and
UAV Visdrone2019 datasets were used for the experimental evaluation.
The VisDrone2019 [43] dataset is a large UAV perspective dataset. In the ofﬁcial data,
there are 6471 images in the train set, 1580 images in the test set and 548 images in the
validation set, with a total of 11 categories. The samples in this dataset have the following
characteristics: (1) the objects in small areas are densely distributed; (2) the background is
complex, and there is target occlusion, insufﬁcient light, and interference from objects of a
similar shape, etc. (3), and many objects are occluded. Accordingly, this dataset is suitable
to verify the performance of the Ghost-YOLOS network in detecting small objects. Some
sample pictures of the validation set are shown in Figure 17a.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 28 
 
 
 
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 17. (a) Samples images from VisDrone2019 dataset; (b) Samples images from DOTAv1.0 da-
taset. 
The DOTAv1.0 [44] dataset contains 2806 aerial images, approximately 400 0 × 4000 
in size, with a total of 188,282 instances across 15 categories. We split all images into small 
patches of 1024 × 1024 resolution during training, and used the validation set of this da-
taset as a test in the experiment. Some sample pictures of the validation set are shown in 
Figure 17b. 
3.1.2. Experimental Environment 
The whole experiment is divided into two parts: Ghost-YOLOS lightweight network 
construction and FPGA hardware acceleration. The network construction and training 
are mainly completed on a Personal Computer (PC). To be fair, the training parameters of 
all experiments are set to be the same. The stochastic gradient descent method is used for 
training, the resolution of input images is adjusted to 416  × 416 through preprocessing, 
and the batch size is set to 8. All models are trained with 200 epochs. The maxi mum 
learning rate is 
21 10 −×  when the minimum is 
41 10 −× , and the decreasing mode is cosine 
decreasing. The experimental environment of PC is detailed in Table 2. 
Table 2. Experimental environment of PC. 
Environment Versions or Procedure 
CPU Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8700 K, 3.70 GHz 
GPU NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti, 11 GB Memory  
CUDA v11.3 
Python v3.9.7 
PyTorch v1.11 
OS Windows 10 
To evaluate the performance of the hardware accelerator, the SoC Xilinx ZYNQ 
Z7020 is used for CNN implementation. In addition to the FPGA chip, the system is 
equipped with 1 GB DDR3 SDRAM for storing feature maps and weight parameters. The 
whole project is built based on Vivado 2018.3 and Vivado HLS 2018.3. The Vivado HLS 
part implemented is based on C++, which is used for high-level synthesis of IP core of the 
preprocessing and post -processing module. The Vivado part is implemented based on 
Verilog for the construction of the convolution computing module PE and the synthesis 
Figure 17. (a) Samples images from VisDrone2019 dataset; (b) Samples images from DOTAv1.0 dataset.
The DOTAv1.0 [44] dataset contains 2806 aerial images, approximately 4000× 4000
in size, with a total of 188,282 instances across 15 categories. We split all images into
small patches of 1024× 1024 resolution during training, and used the validation set of this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 16]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 16 of 27
dataset as a test in the experiment. Some sample pictures of the validation set are shown
in Figure 17b.
3.1.2. Experimental Environment
The whole experiment is divided into two parts: Ghost-YOLOS lightweight network
construction and FPGA hardware acceleration. The network construction and training are
mainly completed on a Personal Computer (PC). To be fair, the training parameters of all
experiments are set to be the same. The stochastic gradient descent method is used for
training, the resolution of input images is adjusted to 416× 416 through preprocessing,
and the batch size is set to 8. All models are trained with 200 epochs. The maximum
learning rate is 1× 10−2 when the minimum is 1× 10−4, and the decreasing mode is cosine
decreasing. The experimental environment of PC is detailed in Table 2.
Table 2. Experimental environment of PC.
Environment Versions or Procedure
CPU Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8700 K, 3.70 GHz
GPU NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti, 11 GB Memory
CUDA v11.3
Python v3.9.7
PyTorch v1.11
OS Windows 10
To evaluate the performance of the hardware accelerator, the SoC Xilinx ZYNQ Z7020
is used for CNN implementation. In addition to the FPGA chip, the system is equipped
with 1 GB DDR3 SDRAM for storing feature maps and weight parameters. The whole
project is built based on Vivado 2018.3 and Vivado HLS 2018.3. The Vivado HLS part
implemented is based on C++, which is used for high-level synthesis of IP core of the
preprocessing and post-processing module. The Vivado part is implemented based on
Verilog for the construction of the convolution computing module PE and the synthesis
and implementation of the overall project. The clock cycle of the entire system is set at 150
MHz. Figure 18 shows the hardware conﬁguration for the experiment.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 28 
 
 
and implementation of the overall project. The clock cycle of the entire system is set at 150 
MHz. Figure 18 shows the hardware conﬁguration for the experiment.  
 
Figure 18. The hardware conﬁguration for the experiment. 
3.2. Experimental Results 
3.2.1. Ablation Experiment of Ghost-YOLOS Network 
Ablation experiments are performed to verify the eﬀectiveness of the respective class 
of improvements in the Ghost-YOLOS network. Figure 19 presents the trend of the mAP 
and loss function value of DOTA and Visdrone2019 datasets trained using the 
Ghost-YOLOS network before quantization. All curves are smoothed for better observa-
tion of trends. 
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 19. Network training result: (a) mAP of the two datasets; (b) loss curves of the two datasets. 
Table 3 lists the Ablation Experiment results o f the two datasets. The original 
YOLOv3 serves as  baseline, and the Ghost -YOLOS is the ﬁnal version after the im-
provements are added. Based on the YOLOv3, a total of four improvements are added, 
expressed in the following. 
  
Figure 18. The hardware conﬁguration for the experiment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 17]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 17 of 27
3.2. Experimental Results
3.2.1. Ablation Experiment of Ghost-YOLOS Network
Ablation experiments are performed to verify the effectiveness of the respective class of
improvements in the Ghost-YOLOS network. Figure 19 presents the trend of the mAP and
loss function value of DOTA and Visdrone2019 datasets trained using the Ghost-YOLOS
network before quantization. All curves are smoothed for better observation of trends.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 28 
 
 
and implementation of the overall project. The clock cycle of the entire system is set at 150 
MHz. Figure 18 shows the hardware conﬁguration for the experiment.  
 
Figure 18. The hardware conﬁguration for the experiment. 
3.2. Experimental Results 
3.2.1. Ablation Experiment of Ghost-YOLOS Network 
Ablation experiments are performed to verify the eﬀectiveness of the respective class 
of improvements in the Ghost-YOLOS network. Figure 19 presents the trend of the mAP 
and loss function value of DOTA and Visdrone2019 datasets trained using the 
Ghost-YOLOS network before quantization. All curves are smoothed for better observa-
tion of trends. 
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 19. Network training result: (a) mAP of the two datasets; (b) loss curves of the two datasets. 
Table 3 lists the Ablation Experiment results o f the two datasets. The original 
YOLOv3 serves as  baseline, and the Ghost -YOLOS is the ﬁnal version after the im-
provements are added. Based on the YOLOv3, a total of four improvements are added, 
expressed in the following. 
  
Figure 19. Network training result: (a) mAP of the two datasets; (b) loss curves of the two datasets.
Table 3 lists the Ablation Experiment results of the two datasets. The original YOLOv3
serves as baseline, and the Ghost-YOLOS is the ﬁnal version after the improvements are
added. Based on the YOLOv3, a total of four improvements are added, expressed in
the following.
Table 3. Ablation experiment results on the two datasets.
Model Dataset mAP
(%) (*,*)
Parameters
(M) (*)
Size
(MB) (*)
YOLOv3
DOTA
v1.0
55.61 61.52 248.0
+GhostNet 63.41 (+7.80, +7.80) 23.52 (38.23%) 179.0 (72.18%)
+Model Pruning 60.48 ( −2.93, +4.87) 6.71 (10.91%) 25.3 (10.20%)
+Knowledge Distillation 62.90 (+2.42, +7.29) 6.67 (10.84%) 25.1 (10.12%)
+Quantization 62.65 ( −0.25, +7.04) 6.67 (10.84%) 12.6 (5.08%)
YOLOv3
VisDrone2019
22.07 61.48 248.0
+GhostNet 27.48 (+5.41, +5.41) 23.49 (38.21%) 179.0 (72.18%)
+Model Pruning 24.62 ( −2.86, +2.55) 5.85 (9.52%) 30.2 (12.18%)
+Knowledge Distillation 26.83 (+2.21, +4.76) 5.81 (9.45%) 30.1 (12.13%)
+Quantization 26.61 ( −0.22, +4.54) 5.81 (9.45%) 15.4 (6.21%)
Note: (*,*) represents (mAP increased by this model compared with the previous model, mAP increased by this
model compared with the initial model); (*) represents (the percentage of the model parameters compared with
the initial model).
First, the backbone of YOLOv3 is replaced with GhostNet from DarkNet53. Under the
effect of this improvement, the mAP is increased by 7.80%, the number of model parameters
is reduced by 61.77%, and the model size is reduced by 72.18% on the DOTA dataset.
Additionally, this improvement leads to the increased mAP by 5.41%, the reduced number
of model parameters by 61.79%, and the reduced model size by 72.18% on the VisDrone
dataset. As indicated by the improvement of a wide variety of indicators, GhostNet
outperforms DarkNet53 in YOLOv3, suggesting the effectiveness of this improvement.
Second, channel pruning is performed on the model to reduce the number of parame-
ters. On the DOTA dataset, this improvement leads to the reduced number of parameters
of the model by 71.65% and the reduced size of the model by 85.24%. Moreover, the mAP
of the model is reduced by 2.93%. Under the effect of this improvement, the number of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 18]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 18 of 27
parameters of the model is reduced by 72.57% on the VisDrone dataset, and the size of the
model declines by 83.18%. Furthermore, the mAP of the model is reduced by 2.86%. Al-
though the overall accuracy is affected, the number of parameters and the size of the model
are notably reduced, such that the memory consumption and the difﬁculty of hardware
deployment are reduced.
Third, knowledge distillation is adopted to recover the accuracy lost after model
pruning. On the DOTA dataset, this improvement leads to the improved model mAP by
2.42%; on the VisDrone dataset, the model mAP is improved by 2.21%. Compared with the
model before pruning, the accuracy loss of the model after knowledge distillation falls into
a scope of 0.7%, suggesting the effectiveness of knowledge distillation in accuracy recovery.
Fourth, the 16-ﬁxed quantization of the weights and feature map parameters is per-
formed, thus leading to a reduced model size by approximately 50% on both datasets with
a 0.3% loss of accuracy. Through this improvement, the resource consumption of neural
network hardware deployment is notably reduced, and the overall inference speed of the
network is increased.
3.2.2. FPGA Accelerator Performance
A series of parallelism experiments are set (Table 4) to explore the optimal parallelism de-
gree. To confirm the effectiveness of the proposed depth-wise convolutional computation archi-
tecture, a controlled experiment is set without using depth-wise convolutional architectures.
Table 4. The performance of CNN accelerator with different parallelism degrees.
Experiment 1 2 3 4
Common Convolution Parallelism
(C× R) 8× 8 10 × 10 13 × 13 10 × 10
Depthwise Convolution Parallelism
(P× R× Q) 9× 2× 3 9 × 2× 6 9 × 6× 3 N/A
Resource Redundancy 7 8 7 N/A
Throughput (GOPS) 18.24 29.53 36.48 22.16
DSP Blocks 69 113 174 105
DSP Efﬁciency
(GOPS/DSP) 0.264 0.261 0.210 0.211
Note: Resource Redundancy means the difference between Common Convolution Parallelism and Depthwise
Convolution Parallelism, which represents the amount of redundant resources in one operation when the hardware
resources of the other operation are fully utilized.
As revealed by Experiment 1, 2 and 3 with the increase of the parallelism, the through-
put of the CNN accelerator is also increased with the usage of the PE units. However,
the DSP efﬁciency reaches its maximum under the ordinary convolution parallelism of
8× 8. The reason for the above result is that in the Ghost-YOLOS, the output channels
of the 16 GBN modules reach 16, 24, 24, 40, 40, 80, 80, 80, 80, 112, 112, 160, 160, 160, 160,
and 160. As indicated by this result, the number of output channels is a multiple of 8,
such that selecting 8 as the parallel factor can make the convolutional layers with different
numbers of channels or step sizes develop a uniﬁed data acquisition logic. A total of 11 of
the 16 GBN modules have output channels that are multiples of 10, such that choosing a
parallel factor of 10 also exhibits high-DSP efﬁciency, only 0.003 less than a parallel factor
of 8. Thus, the proposed CNN accelerator selects 10 as its parallelism factor to achieve
higher computational throughput. The comparison of experiments 2 and 4 suggests that the
throughput of the CNN accelerator is improved by 33.2% with the depth-wise convolution
computing architecture, such that the effectiveness of the design of this study is conﬁrmed.
Table 5 presents the hardware resource consumption of the CNN hardware accelerator.
For the full CNN accelerator, the consumption of LUT, FF, BRAM, and DSP reaches 36,528,
30,252, 84, and 113, respectively. Most of the BRAM resources are adopted to cache

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 19]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 19 of 27
the feature map and weight parameters in the DDR, and most of the DSP resources are
employed to develop the PE computing unit. As indicated by the result of in the ZYNQ7020
with very limited hardware resources, the proposed lightweight network can still be
deployed with less than 70% hardware utilization, suggesting that the scheme of this study
is promising in the deployment of edge devices.
Table 5. The hardware resource consumption of the CNN hardware accelerator.
Resource LUT FF BRAM_36K DSP
Available 53,200 106,400 140 220
Consumption 36,528 30,252 84 113
Utilization (%) 68.66 28.43 60.00 57.73
Moreover, the performance of the CNN accelerator is evaluated for computing power
and power consumption. For computing power, Giga Operations per Second (GOPS) serves
as the evaluation metric in this study, suggesting the number of operations performed by
the accelerator per unit time. Vivado’s internal power estimator is employed for power
consumption. The CNN accelerator computing performance reaches 29.53 GOPS at the
clock frequency of 150 MHz by inferencing all pictures in the validation set of both datasets.
The power consumption of the whole system reaches 2.982 W, where the static power
of the hardware is 0.336 W, and the power efﬁciency is 9.90 GOPS/W. As revealed by
the above-described result, the proposed CNN accelerator is capable of meeting a good
computational performance overhead with low power consumption, thus conforming to
the low-power edge device deployment requirements.
In addition, the target detection performance of the accelerator is examined (e.g.,
inference time and detection accuracy). For the DOTA dataset, 5297 images in the validation
set are tested, and an average inference time of 0.32 s per image, a mAP of 62.58%, and a
total accuracy loss of less than 0.5% are ﬁnally obtained compared with the original model.
For the VisDrone2019 dataset, 548 images in the validation set are tested, and an average
inference time of 0.28 s per image, a mAP of 26.55%, and a total accuracy loss of less than
0.6% are obtained compared with the original model. The CNN accelerator is capable of
completing the network inference with a small loss of accuracy, and the fast speed can also
conform to the real-time requirements. Figure 20 illustrates some detection results.
Sensors 2023, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 28 
 
 
where the static power of the hardware is 0.33 6 W , and the power eﬃciency is 9.90 
GOPS/W. As revealed by the above- described result, the proposed CNN accelerator is 
capable of meeting a good computational performance overhead  with low power con-
sumption, thus conforming to the low-power edge device deployment requirements. 
In addition, the target detection performance of the accelerator is examined (e.g., 
inference time and detection accuracy). For the DOTA dataset, 5297 images  in the vali-
dation set are tested, and an average inference time of 0.32 s per image, a mAP of 62.58%, 
and a total accuracy loss of less than 0.5% are ﬁnally obtained compared with the original 
model. For the VisDrone2019 dataset, 548 images in the valida tion set are tested, and an 
average inference time of 0.28 s per image, a mAP of 26.55%, and a total accuracy loss of 
less than 0.6% are obtained compared with the original model. The CNN accelerator is 
capable of completing the network inference with a sm all loss of accuracy, and the fast 
speed can also conform to the real -time requirements. Figure 20 illustrates some detec-
tion results. 
 
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 20. CNN accelerator detection results: ( a) from Visdrone2019 dataset, and ( b) from DO-
TAv1.0 dataset. 
Then, we compared the proposed CNN accelerator computing power with that the 
CPU and GPU, as shown in Table 6. The power consumption of  the CPU and GPU in 
network inference is 95 W and 250 W, respectively, which are 32× and 84× higher than the 
power consumption of the 2.98 W  proposed CNN accelerator. Compared with  a 
high-power CPU and GPU, our FPGA is more suitable for low -power edge device de-
ployment. 
Although the throughput of CPU and GPU is higher than that of the proposed CNN 
accelerator, both of them perform worse than the proposed CNN accelerator for power 
eﬃciency. It can be seen that , with a batch size equal to 1, although the CPU and GPU 
clock frequencies are 24.7× and 9.0× higher than that of FPGA, respectively, the proposed 
CNN accelera tor achieves 29.11×  better power eﬃciency than that of CPU, and even 
achieves about 5.29× better power eﬃciency than that of GPU. The high power eﬃciency 
represents the excellent computational performance of the proposed CNN accelerator, 
making it not only capable of being deployed in edge devices with limited resources, but 
also capable of completing faster computations with less power. 
 
 
Figure 20. CNN accelerator detection results: ( a) from Visdrone2019 dataset, and ( b) from
DOTAv1.0 dataset.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 20]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 20 of 27
Then, we compared the proposed CNN accelerator computing power with that the
CPU and GPU, as shown in Table 6. The power consumption of the CPU and GPU in
network inference is 95 W and 250 W, respectively, which are 32× and 84× higher than the
power consumption of the 2.98 W proposed CNN accelerator. Compared with a high-power
CPU and GPU, our FPGA is more suitable for low-power edge device deployment.
Table 6. Evaluation results on CPU, GPU and proposed CNN accelerator.
CPU GPU FPGA
Device Intel(R) Core (TM)
i7-8700 K
NVIDIA GeForce RTX
2080 Ti
Xilinx ZYNQ
Z7020
Technology (nm) 14 10 28
Frequency (MHz) 3700 1350 150
Power (W) 95 250 2.98
Batch Size 1 1 1
mAP (%) 1 62.65 62.65 62.58
Throughput
(GOPS) 32.35 467.22 29.53
Power Efﬁciency
(GOPS/W) 0.34 1.87 9.90
Power Efﬁciency
Ratio 1× 5.50× 29.11×
Note: 1 The mAP is for DOTA dataset to evaluate the performance of the three devices. Batch Size means the
number of samples used for an inference.
Although the throughput of CPU and GPU is higher than that of the proposed CNN
accelerator, both of them perform worse than the proposed CNN accelerator for power
efﬁciency. It can be seen that, with a batch size equal to 1, although the CPU and GPU clock
frequencies are 24.7× and 9.0× higher than that of FPGA, respectively, the proposed CNN
accelerator achieves 29.11× better power efﬁciency than that of CPU, and even achieves
about 5.29× better power efﬁciency than that of GPU. The high power efﬁciency represents
the excellent computational performance of the proposed CNN accelerator, making it not
only capable of being deployed in edge devices with limited resources, but also capable of
completing faster computations with less power.
For object detection tasks, the accuracy of the proposed CNN accelerator falls into a
scope of 0.1% compared with that of the CPU and GPU. We consider that such accuracy loss
is mainly due to the hardware optimization of the SE module and the accuracy limitation
of ﬂoating-point arithmetic, and this accuracy loss is acceptable in practical applications.
3.3. Performance Comparison
To better show the performance of the proposed lightweight network and hardware
accelerator, we set up a series of comparative experiments. First, we compared the perfor-
mance of the Ghost-YOLOS network with other networks on the same data set, including
accuracy, calculated amount, and number of parameters, as shown in Table 7. We compared
the performance of the Ghost-YOLOS network with some classical models [ 45–48], and
some recent innovative models [49–53] on the DOTA and VisDrone datasets.
For the DOTA dataset, The RetinaNet used in Ref. [45] has considerable parameters
and its accuracy is not as good as some commonly used networks. The YOLOv4-tiny
network used by Ref. [ 46] has 0.8 M fewer parameters than our Ghost-YOLOS, but its
accuracy is 4.4% lower than our network. The YOLOv5s network used by Ref. [47] has 0.7%
higher accuracy than Ghost-YOLOS. However, the number of parameters and GFLOPs are
0.5 M and 2.17 higher than those of Ghost-YOLOS, respectively, and the YOLOv5s network
has considerable residual structures, which will increase the number of memory accesses in
hardware, and is not conducive to the acceleration of network inference. Refs. [45,49] have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 21]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 21 of 27
improved on the original network and achieved better detection performance. However,
the improvement of Faster-RCNN in Ref. [45] still has the characteristic that the number
of parameters is too large. The R2-YOLOS proposed in Ref. [49] performs better than our
network for detection accuracy, but its parameter quantity and computation amount are
1.67× and 3.40× more than that of Ghost-YOLOS, respectively, which is too large to meet
the real-time detection requirements of edge equipment. Compared with the conventional
two-stage detection algorithm, the one-stage detection algorithm adopted by Ghost-YOLOS
has a smaller size and less computation, and because of the replacement of the backbone,
the model can achieve higher accuracy.
Table 7. Comparison of performance on the DOTA and VisDrone dataset.
Model Backbone Dataset mAP
(%)
Parameters
(M) GFLOPs
IMP-FRCNN [49] ResNet50
DOTA
v1.0
58.0 N/A 134.5
RetinaNet [45] ResNet101 38.9 55.4 179.5
YOLOv4-tiny [46] CSPDarknet53 58.3 5.9 N/A
YOLOv5s [47] CSPRepResNet 63.5 7.2 10.58
R2-YOLOS [50] ResNet50 66.3 11.2 28.58
Ghost-YOLOS (ours) GhostNet 62.7 6.7 8.41
FRCNN [48] ResNet50
VisDrone
2019
13.5 41.17 134.5
RetinaNet [45] ResNet101 8.9 55.4 179.5
RFNet [51] ResNet50 15.2 79.57 N/A
VAMYOLOX-X [52] CSPDarkNet53 24.5 104.6 510.4
LV-YOLOv5 [53] CSPRepResNet 25.6 36.6 38.8
Ghost-YOLOS (ours) GhostNet 26.6 5.8 7.63
Note: N/A means we did not ﬁnd the exact data in the references.
For the VisDrone dataset, we obtained the best performance from the Refs. [45,48,51–53].
We achieved the highest accuracy of 26.6% with the lowest parameter count of 5.8 M and
GFLOPs of 7.63. This is because the splicing structure of the Ghost module and the SE
attention mechanism make our network have a stronger effect on small target detection.
The performance of our network in two datasets shows that Ghost-YOLOS can play a
good performance in aerial and UAV object detection, and its lightweight calculation and
parameter amount makes it very suitable for deployment in edge devices with limited
computing resources.
In addition, we compared the proposed CNN accelerator with previous works [54–59],
as shown in Table 8. Ref. [54] proposed a CNN accelerator which used network compres-
sion and layer-chaining techniques. Ref. [55] designed a highly ﬂexible and reconﬁgurable
accelerator, which mainly focuses on the problem that transposed convolution, dilated
convolution and depth-wise convolution have low utilization in the common convolution
engine. Ref. [ 56] proposed an energy-efﬁcient architecture for super-resolution images.
However, the hardware implementation in Refs. [ 54–56] consumes 1536, 607, and 1512
DSPs, respectively, which is 13.6×, 5.4×, and 13.4× more than that of the proposed solu-
tion. It is difﬁcult to implement in the case of limited hardware resources, and their DSP
efﬁciency is lower than the proposed CNN accelerator. Ref. [ 57] designed a composite
hardware accelerator, which proposed a multiple single computing engine architecture
based on a row-level pipelined streaming strategy. The accelerator achieves the TOPS-level
of throughput with extremely high DSP efﬁciency. However, such excellent performance
brings great hardware resource consumption. The design consumes 3395 DSPS and reaches
14.36 W power, which is 30.04× more and 4.8× higher than that of our accelerator, re-
spectively. This limits its application in power-sensitive scenarios. Ref. [ 58] proposed a
self-adaptive CNN accelerator, which can modify its architecture while inferencing the
networks. Ref. [59] proposed an automatic CNN deployment solution on resource-limited
devices. Both works [ 58,59] used less DSP resources to implement the inference of the
CNN. However, the accelerator in Refs. [58,59] only achieves 10.25 GOPS and 22.17 GOPS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 22]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 22 of 27
throughput, respectively. Compared with the design where the whole network is repeatedly
stacked with modules in the order of the respective layer, the proposed CNN accelerator
can perform different types of convolution computing using a single PE array, such that
the efﬁciency of hardware resources can be signiﬁcantly increased.
Table 8. Comparison of proposed CNN accelerator with previous works.
Architecture [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] Our work
FPGA Intel
Arria 10
Intel
Arria 10
Xilinx
XC7K410T VX980T Xilinx
ZYNQ Z7020
Xilinx
AC701
Xilinx
ZYNQ Z7020
Model StyleNet ENet CNN+
DCNN VGG16 Tiny YOLO IMP YOLOv2 Ghost-YOLOS
Network Complexity
(GFLOPS) 37.60 3.68 3.30 15.47 5.41 379.55 8.41
Quantization 16-Fixed 16-Fixed 13-Fixed 8/16-Fixed 16-Fixed 8-Fixed 16-Fixed
Frequency
(MHz) 200 200 130 150 150 200 150
DSP Blocks 1536 607 1512 3395 99 94 113
Throughput
(GOPS) 335.0 97.2 390 1000 10.25 22.17 29.53
Power
(W) 5.90 N/A 5.38 14.36 N/A 3.407 2.98
Power Efﬁciency
(GOPS/W) 56.76 N/A 72.49 69.64 N/A 6.51 9.90
DSP Efﬁciency
(GOPS/DSP) 0.218 0.160 0.258 0.295 0.104 0.236 0.261
Note: N/A means we did not ﬁnd the exact data in the references.
In brief, our accelerator has lower power consumption and higher DSP efﬁciency in the
identical scale processing engine. Compared with the previous works, the proposed CNN
accelerator has a better balance in throughput, resource and power, and is more suitable for
deployment in edge devices with limited resources and strict power requirements.
4. Discussion
The YOLO series network has evolved into numerous versions thus far, and YOLOv3
does not exhibit the optimal performance among these versions. However, it is selected as
the original network in this study due to the comprehensive consideration of the throughput
and resources of the accelerator. The network backbone after YOLOv2 has an excessive
amount of residual blocks, which will hinder hardware processing. Cross-layer operation
represents multiple memory access for hardware, which will cause extra memory overhead
and hardware resource consumption (especially LUT and FF). Accordingly, its backbone
network is replaced with GhostNet. Subsequently, special attention should be paid to the
neck and head parts of YOLO. YOLOv4 employs SPP (Spatial Pyramid Pooling) + PANet
(Path Aggregation Network) for the neck part compared with YOLOv3, which improves
the precision while increasing the network depth and the number of parameters. YOLOv5
adds more residual structure and concatenate modules, thus hindering the hardware
implementation of the network.
Moreover, GhostNet exhibits excellent performance on YOLOv3 by signiﬁcantly re-
ducing its parameter count while achieving comparable accuracy to YOLOv5s. However,
the performance of YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 is not signiﬁcantly improved. Experiments are
performed on the DOTA dataset, and the results suggest that YOLOv4-Ghost only achieves
a 1.6% increase in accuracy compared with the original network, while YOLOv5-Ghost only
achieves an improvement of 0.7%. Given hardware resource consumption and performance
comprehensively, the YOLOv3 network is ultimately selected as the base model. This
decision is made following a thorough evaluation of multiple factors, which comprises the
trade-off between hardware feasibility, resource constraints, accuracy, and performance.
Although the subsequent versions of the YOLO network may exhibit increased accuracy,
our choice of YOLOv3 as the original network best conforms to speciﬁc requirements.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 23]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 23 of 27
After the original network is lightened, the Ghost-YOLOS network is deployed into
Xilinx ZYNQ Z7020, and a series of hardware optimizations are performed for network
characteristics. 1. Because depth-wise convolution and common convolution exist in
Ghost-YOLOS network, a reconﬁgurable convolution operation array is designed to save
hardware resources. 2. To reduce the delay of data transmission between memory and
processing unit, a series of memory access optimization schemes are designed for BRAM.
3. Due to the poor hardware friendliness of SE attention mechanism, the approximate
implementation of activation function and optimization scheme of maximum pooling. As
indicated by the experimental results, our optimization scheme can improve the throughput
and energy efﬁciency of the accelerator.
After comparison, certain limitations are identiﬁed in the application of proposed
lightweight network and CNN accelerator:
• The pruning and distillation methods used in this study are strictly affected by the
model and cannot improve the detection accuracy of the model itself, so it is necessary
to use more lightweight methods targeted at the model structure.
• Floating-point computation is not applicable to FPGA, so data quantization is very
necessary. However, the quantization method employed in this study inevitably
causes precision loss, such that a more ﬁne-grained quantization method should be
developed to reduce the effect on precision.
• The solution in this study proposes a reconﬁgurable convolution computing array to
perform convolution computing of different modes. However, the hardware resource
limitation of the FPGA applied leads to the inability of parallelism to expand to a higher
dimension, such that inevitable resource redundancy is caused. Accordingly, chips
with richer hardware resources may achieve higher resource utilization efﬁciency.
Based on the innovation and limitation of the proposed solution, several possible uses
and effects are indicated:
• The proposed accelerator operators include common convolution, deep convolution,
SE attention mechanism, full connection and Max pooling, etc., which are not only
suitable for Ghost-YOLOS network, but also applicable to any network consisting of
stacks of these modules (e.g., MobileNet and ShufﬂeNet). Hardware acceleration of
this type of network can be achieved only by changing the task scheduling at the PS
side, which offers novel ideas for the application of FPGA technology in deep learning.
• The proposed solution has the characteristics of low power consumption, high energy
efﬁciency, high throughput and high precision, such that it can be applied to the ﬁeld
of remote sensing object detection. Additionally, it can be integrated with advanced
sensors, Internet of Things (IoT) and human–computer interaction technologies (e.g.,
mobile robots and exploration vehicles) to expand its application prospects.
5. Conclusions
In this study, a lightweight remote sensing image detection model, Ghost-YOLOS,
and its energy-efﬁcient CNN accelerator solution are proposed based on the FPGA, which
comprises model optimization methods and a hardware acceleration architecture.
Through the optimization of the model, the model parameters and size are primarily
reduced as much as possible, while the accuracy can be ensured, with the aim of adapting
to the edge devices deployment. Accordingly, GhostNet, a lightweight feature extraction
network, is introduced, and channel pruning is conducted on the whole model. A knowl-
edge distillation method is adopted to recover the accuracy lost by the parameter number
reduction. Lastly, 16-bit ﬁxed-point quantization is performed prior to deployment in
the hardware.
An efﬁcient CNN accelerator is proposed for hardware acceleration. A reconﬁg-
urable PE array with high parallelism is developed in accordance with the characteristics
of different convolution in the Ghost-YOLOS network, which is capable of performing
different types of convolution computing according to the control signal. The SE atten-
tion mechanism in the GBN module is optimized at the hardware level, comprising 2D

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 24]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 24 of 27
pooling separation and Sigmoid activation function hardware implementation. For data
storage optimization, different storage methods are designed following to the characteris-
tics of feature maps and weights, and a dual cache design is implemented to save memory
access overhead.
Compared with the design that the whole network is repeatedly stacked with modules
in the order of the respective layer, the CNN accelerator developed in this study exhibits
the structure of a single convolution computing array, which is capable of performing
different types of convolution computing based on the control signal, such that the on-
chip physical resources can be saved, with the aim of carrying out more dimensions of
parallelism expansion.
In general, in comparison with the original YOLOv3 network, the mAP of the Ghost-
YOLOS on the aerial dataset DOTAv1.0 is increased by 7.04%, the number of parameters
only accounts for 10.84% of the original model, and the model size is reduced to 5.08%.
Moreover, on the UAV dataset VisDrone2019, the mAP of the Ghost-YOLOS is improved
by 4.54%, the number of parameters only takes up 9.45% of the original model, and the
model size declines to 6.21%. Accordingly, the Ghost-YOLOS outperforms YOLOv3 in
efﬁciency, and it more signiﬁcantly applies to deployment on edge devices with limited
computing resources.
Subsequently, the Ghost-YOLOS network is well deployed on Xilinx ZYNQ Z7020
using the proposed CNN acceleration scheme. As indicated by the experimental results,
the power of the proposed CNN accelerator only reaches 2.98 W, and the DSP consumption
only reaches 113. The object detection of the two datasets achieves the throughput of the
CNN accelerator of 29.53 GOPS, the power efﬁciency of 9.90 GOPS/W, as well as the DSP
efﬁciency of 0.261 GOPS/DSP . As indicated by the comparison with the previous works, the
proposed solution is characterized by low power consumption, low resource consumption,
and high efﬁciency, thus becoming promising in the deployment of remote sensing edge
devices with strict power requirements and limited resources.
In further research, the existing pruning and knowledge distillation schemes will
be replaced, and more lightweight methods will be designed for the network structure.
Moreover, the hardware of higher versions of YOLO networks will be optimized, and more
hardware-friendly quantization schemes will be designed.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.Y. and Z.C.; methodology, R.Y.; software, R.Y. and Z.C.;
validation, R.Y., Z.C. and B.W.; formal analysis, L.H. and Z.C.; investigation, Z.C. and Y.G.; resources,
Z.C.; data curation, L.H.; writing—original draft preparation, R.Y. and Z.C.; writing—review and
editing, R.Y. and Z.C.; visualization, B.W. and Y.G.; supervision, R.Y. and Z.C.; project administration,
Z.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
nos. 61701148).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
FPGA Field Programmable Gate Array
GPU Graphics Processing Unit
CPU Central Processing Unit
SE Squeeze and Excitation
BN Batch Normalization
ASIC Application Speciﬁc Integrated Circuit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 25]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 25 of 27
MACC Multiplication Accumulators
PE Processing Engine
WPE Window Processing Engine
BPE Block Processing Engine
DDR Double Data Rate
SDRAM Synchronous Dynamic Random-Access Memory
BRAM Block Random-Access Memory
PL Programmable Logic
PS Processing System
mAP mean Average Precision
GOPS Giga Operations per Second
DSP Digital Signal Processor
LUT Look-Up Table
FF Flip-Flop
PC Personal Computer
R&D Research and Development
IoT Internet of Things
References
1. Yu, J.; Huang, D.; Wang, L.; Guo, J.; Wang, Y. A real-time on-board ship targets detection method for optical remote sensing
satellite. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 13th International Conference on Signal Processing (ICSP), Chengdu, China, 6–10
November 2016; pp. 204–208.
2. Xu, M.; Chen, L.; Shi, H.; Yang, Z.; Li, J.; Long, T. FPGA-Based Implementation of Ship Detection for Satellite On-Board Processing.
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 2022, 15, 9733–9745. [CrossRef]
3. Xiong, B.; Sun, Z.; Wang, J.; Leng, X.; Ji, K. A Lightweight Model for Ship Detection and Recognition in Complex-Scene SAR
Images. Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 6053. [CrossRef]
4. Zhang, B.; Zhang, Y.; Li, Y.; Wan, Y.; Yao, Y. CloudViT: A Lightweight Vision Transformer Network for Remote Sensing Cloud
Detection. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 2023, 20, 5000405. [CrossRef]
5. Wu, Z.; Li, J.; Wang, Y.; Hu, Z.; Molinier, M. Self-Attentive Generative Adversarial Network for Cloud Detection in High
Resolution Remote Sensing Images. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 2020, 17, 1792–1796. [CrossRef]
6. Wang, Y.; Ma, L.; Wang, Q.; Wang, N.; Wang, D.; Wang, X.; Zheng, Q.; Hou, X.; Ouyang, G. A Lightweight and High-Accuracy
Deep Learning Method for Grassland Grazing Livestock Detection Using UAV Imagery.Remote Sens. 2023, 15, 1593. [CrossRef]
7. Rhodes, E.C.; Perotto-Baldivieso, H.L.; Reeves, M.C.; Gonzalez, L.A. Perspectives on the Special Issue for Applications of Remote
Sensing for Livestock and Grazingland Management. Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 1882. [CrossRef]
8. Sun, S.; Yang, Z.; Ma, T. Lightweight Remote Sensing Road Detection Network. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 2022, 19, 6510805.
[CrossRef]
9. Liu, B.; Ding, J.; Zou, J.; Wang, J.; Huang, S. LDANet: A Lightweight Dynamic Addition Network for Rural Road Extraction from
Remote Sensing Images. Remote Sens. 2023, 15, 1829. [CrossRef]
10. Pitonak, R.; Mucha, J.; Dobis, L.; Javorka, M.; Marusin, M. CloudSatNet-1: FPGA-Based Hardware-Accelerated Quantized CNN
for Satellite On-Board Cloud Coverage Classiﬁcation. Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 3180. [CrossRef]
11. Yao, Y.; Jiang, Z.; Zhang, H.; Zhou, Y. On-board ship detection in micro-nano satellite based on deep learning and COTS
component. Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 762. [CrossRef]
12. Pang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Wei, X.; Chen, B. SOCNet: A Lightweight and Fine-Grained Object Recognition Network for
Satellite On-Orbit Computing. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 2022, 60, 5632913. [CrossRef]
13. Koubaa, A.; Ammar, A.; Abdelkader, M.; Alhabashi, Y.; Ghouti, L. AERO: AI-Enabled Remote Sensing Observation with Onboard
Edge Computing in UAVs. Remote Sens. 2023, 15, 1873. [CrossRef]
14. Kulig, B.; Waga, J.; Oleksy, A.; Rapacz, M.; Kołodziejczyk, M.; W˛ e˙zyk, P .; Klimek-Kopyra, A.; Witkowicz, R.; Skoczowski, A.;
Podolska, G.; et al. Forecasting of Hypoallergenic Wheat Productivity Based on Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Remote Sensing
Approach—Case Study. Agriculture 2023, 13, 282. [CrossRef]
15. Ridolﬁ, E.; Manciola, P . Water Level Measurements from Drones: A Pilot Case Study at a Dam Site.Water 2018, 10, 297. [CrossRef]
16. Hassan, S.R.; Ahmad, I.; Ahmad, S.; Alfaify, A.; Shaﬁq, M. Remote Pain Monitoring Using Fog Computing for e-Healthcare: An
Efﬁcient Architecture.Sensors 2020, 20, 6574. [CrossRef]
17. Howard, A.G.; Zhu, M.; Chen, B.; Kalenichenko, D.; Wang, W.; Weyand, T.; Andreetto, M.; Adam, H. MobileNets: Efﬁcient
Convolutional Neural Networks for Mobile Vision Applications. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1704.04861. Available online: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1704.04861 (accessed on 17 April 2017).
18. Zhang, X.; Zhou, X.; Lin, M.; Sun, J. ShufﬂeNet: An Extremely Efﬁcient Convolutional Neural Network for Mobile Devices. arXiv
2017, arXiv:1707.01083. Available online: https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.01083 (accessed on 7 December 2017).
19. Zhao, Y.; Feng, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, Z. Study on Detection and Recognition of Trafﬁc Lights Based on Improved
YOLOv4. Sensors 2022, 22, 7787. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 26]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 26 of 27
20. Saiful Bahri, I.Z.; Saon, S.; Mahamad, A.K.; Isa, K.; Fadlilah, U.; Ahmadon, M.A.B.; Yamaguchi, S. Interpretation of Bahasa Isyarat
Malaysia (BIM) Using SSD-MobileNet-V2 FPNLite and COCO mAP .Information 2023, 14, 319. [CrossRef]
21. Gale, T.; Elsen, E.; Hooker, S. The State of Sparsity in Deep Neural Networks. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1902.09574. Available online:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.09574 (accessed on 2 February 2019).
22. Jorge, P .D.; Sanyal, A.; Behl, H.S.; Torr, P .; Dokania, P .K. Progressive Skeletonization: Trimming More Fat from a Network at
Initialization. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2006.09081. Available online: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.09081 (accessed on 19 March 2021).
23. Gu, S.; Wang, Y.; Wang, N.; Wu, W. Intelligent Optimization of Availability and Communication Cost in Satellite-UAV Mobile
Edge Caching System with Fault-Tolerant Codes. IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw. 2022, 6, 1230–1241. [CrossRef]
24. Ma, X.; Ji, K.; Xiong, B.; Zhang, L.; Feng, S.; Kuang, G. Light-YOLOv4: An Edge-Device Oriented Target Detection Method for
Remote Sensing Images. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 2021, 14, 10808–10820. [CrossRef]
25. Fu, T.; Pang, Y.; Chen, B. UAVDet: A Lightweight Fast Detection Model for Marine Ships based on Edge Mobile Devices. In
Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Unmanned Systems (ICUS), Guangzhou, China, 28–30 October 2022;
pp. 1157–1161.
26. Wei, G.; Hou, Y.; Zhao, Z.; Cui, Q.; Deng, G.; Tao, X. FPGA-Cloud Architecture For CNN. InProceedings of the 2018 24th Asia-Paciﬁc
Conference on Communications (APCC), Ningbo, China, 12–14 November 2018; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2018; pp. 7–8.
27. Tsukada, M.; Kondo, M.; Matsutani, H. A Neural Network-Based On-Device Learning Anomaly Detector for Edge Devices. IEEE
Trans. Comput. 2020, 69, 1027–1044. [CrossRef]
28. Zhang, C.; Fang, Z.; Zhou, P .; Pan, P .; Cong, J. Caffeine: Towards uniformed representation and acceleration for deep convolutional
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), Austin,
TX, USA, 7–10 November 2016; pp. 1–8.
29. Li, L.; Zhang, S.; Wu, J. Efﬁcient Object Detection Framework and Hardware Architecture for Remote Sensing Images.Remote
Sens. 2019, 11, 2376. [CrossRef]
30. Sledeviˇ c, T.; Serackis, A. mNet2FPGA: A Design Flow for Mapping a Fixed-Point CNN to Zynq SoC FPGA.Electronics 2020, 9, 1823.
[CrossRef]
31. Hareth, S.; Mostafa, H.; Shehata, K.A. Low power CNN hardware FPGA implementation. In Proceedings of the 2019 31st
International Conference on Microelectronics (ICM), Cairo, Egypt, 15–18 December 2019; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2019; pp. 162–165.
32. Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; Farhadi, A. You only look once: Uniﬁed, real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 779–788.
33. Redmon, J. YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement.arXiv 2018, arXiv:1804.02767. Available online: https://arxiv .org/abs/1804.02767
(accessed on 8 April 2018).
34. Han, K.; Wang, Y.; Tian, Q.; Guo, J.; Xu, C.; Xu, C. GhostNet: More Features from Cheap Operations. In Proceedings of the 2020
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 13–19 June 2020; pp. 1577–1586.
35. Liu, Z.; Li, J.; Shen, Z.; Huang, G.; Yan, S.; Zhang, C. Learning Efﬁcient Convolutional Networks through Network Slimming.
In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Venice, Italy, 22–29 October 2017; pp.
2755–2763.
36. Hinton, G.E.; Vinyals, O.; Dean, J. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network. arXiv 2015, arXiv:1503.02531. Available online:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531 (accessed on 9 March 2015).
37. Chen, G.; Choi, W.; Xiang, Y.; Han, T.; Chandraker, M.K. Learning Efﬁcient Object Detection Models with Knowledge Distillation.
In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), Long Beach, CA, USA, 4–9
December 2017.
38. Jacob, B. Quantization and Training of Neural Networks for Efﬁcient Integer-Arithmetic-Only Inference. In Proceedings of the
2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–23 June 2018; pp. 2704–2713.
39. Wu, S.; Li, G.; Chen, F.; Shi, L. Training and Inference with Integers in Deep Neural Networks. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1802.04680.
Available online: https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.04680v1 (accessed on 13 February 2018).
40. Qiu, J.; Wang, J.; Yao, S.; Guo, K.; Li, B.; Zhou, E.; Yu, J.; Tang, T.; Xu, N.; Song, S.; et al. Going Deeper with Embedded
FPGA Platform for Convolutional Neural Network. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on
Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA’16), New York, NY, USA, 21–23 February 2016; pp. 26–35.
41. Chollet, F. Xception: Deep Learning with Depthwise Separable Convolutions. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 1800–1807.
42. Hu, J.; Shen, L.; Sun, G. Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–23 June 2018; pp. 7132–7141.
43. Du, D.; Zhu, P .; Wen, L.; Bian, X.; Ling, H.; Hu, Q.; Zheng, J.; Peng, T.; Wang, X.; Zhang, Y.; et al. VisDrone-SOT2019: The
Vision Meets Drone Single Object Tracking Challenge Results. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision Workshop (ICCVW), Seoul, Republic of Korea, 27–28 October 2019; pp. 199–212.
44. Xia, G.S.; Bai, X.; Ding, J.; Zhu, Z.; Belongie, S.; Luo, J.; Datcu, M.; Pelillo, M.; Zhang, L. DOTA: A large-scale dataset for object
detection in aerial images. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City,
UT, USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp. 3974–3983.
45. Gu, L.; Fang, Q.; Wang, Z.; Popov, E.; Dong, G. Learning Lightweight and Superior Detectors with Feature Distillation for
Onboard Remote Sensing Object Detection. Remote Sens. 2023, 15, 370. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

[PAGE 27]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6497 27 of 27
46. Lin, T.Y.; Goyal, P .; Girshick, R.; He, K.; Dollár, P . Focal loss for dense object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, Venice, Italy, 22–29 October 2017; pp. 2980–2988.
47. Zakria, Z.; Deng, J.; Kumar, R.; Khokhar, M.S.; Cai, J.; Kumar, J. Multiscale and Direction Target Detecting in Remote Sensing
Images via Modiﬁed YOLO-v4. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 2022, 15, 1039–1048. [CrossRef]
48. Uzun, Ü.; Temizel, A. Cycle-Spinning Convolution for Object Detection. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 76340–76350. [CrossRef]
49. Liu, F.; Chen, R.; Zhang, J.; Xing, K.; Liu, H.; Qin, J. R2YOLOX: A Lightweight Reﬁned Anchor-Free Rotated Detector for Object
Detection in Aerial Images. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 2022, 60, 5632715. [CrossRef]
50. Ren, S.; He, K.; Girshick, R.; Sun, J. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. 2015, 28, 1137–1149. [CrossRef]
51. Tang, H.; Wu, J. RFNet: Toward High-Quality Object Detection in Aerial Images. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Confer-
ence on Computer Information Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (CISAI), Kunming, China, 17–19 September 2021; pp. 62–66.
52. Yang, Y.; Gao, X.; Wang, Y.; Song, S. VAMYOLOX: An Accurate and Efﬁcient Object Detection Algorithm Based on Visual
Attention Mechanism for UAV Optical Sensors. IEEE Sens. J. 2022, 21, 5529–5542. [CrossRef]
53. Wang, J.; Liu, W.; Zhang, W.; Liu, B. LV-YOLOv5: A light-weight object detector of Vit on Drone-captured Scenarios. In
Proceedings of the 2022 16th IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing (ICSP), Beijing, China, 21–24 October 2022;
pp. 178–183.
54. Kim, S.; Jang, B.; Lee, J.; Bae, H.; Jang, H.; Park, I.-C. A CNN Inference Accelerator on FPGA with Compression and Layer-Chaining
Techniques for Style Transfer Applications. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Regul. Pap. 2023, 70, 1591–1604. [CrossRef]
55. Wu, X.; Ma, Y.; Wang, M.; Wang, Z. A Flexible and Efﬁcient FPGA Accelerator for Various Large-Scale and Lightweight CNNs.
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Regul. Pap. 2022, 69, 1185–1198. [CrossRef]
56. Chang, J.-W.; Kang, K.-W.; Kang, S.-J. An Energy-Efﬁcient FPGA-Based Deconvolutional Neural Networks Accelerator for Single
Image Super-Resolution. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video 2020, 30, 281–295. [CrossRef]
57. Huang, W.; Wu, H.; Chen, Q.; Luo, C.; Zeng, S.; Li, T.; Huang, Y. FPGA-Based High-Throughput CNN Hardware Accelerator
with High Computing Resource Utilization Ratio. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. 2022, 33, 4069–4083. [CrossRef]
58. Madadum, H.; Becerikli, Y. An Adaptive Accelerator for Convolutional Neural Networks Using Partial Reconﬁguration on FPGA.
In Proceedings of the 2022 7th International Conference on Computer Science and Engineering (UBMK), Diyarbakir, Turkey,
14–16 September 2022; pp. 350–354.
59. Yan, T.; Zhang, N.; Li, J.; Liu, W.; Chen, H. Automatic Deployment of Convolutional Neural Networks on FPGA for Spaceborne
Remote Sensing Application. Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 3130. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.